Support for Tacos of Texas comes from H E B, whose meatienda salsas, marinated meats, tortillas, quesos, and more are inspired by the authentic flavors of Mexico. H E B, here. 

Hi, my name is Anthony Macias. I'm a taco blogger and connoisseur from Dallas, Texas. To me, tacos sound like the sound of a bell when you open the taqueria door.

Tejano music playing in the background, and everybody having a great time. This is Anthony, also known as AntEats214, and you're listening to Tacos of Texas on KUT.

Bienvenidos, publicos! En esta esquina tenemos el taco de frijoles! Y en la otra esquina son los de peanut cheese! Welcome to the Bean and Cheese Battle Royale! 

Who's

sweating out there? What's up Taco World? I'm taco journalist Mando Rayo and welcome to the Tacos of Texas podcast season tres tres tres produced by Identity Productions in partnership with KUT and KUTX studios. And we're back exploring taco culture in Texas through the eyes of the people in the Lone Star State.

So grab some beans and lots of cheese and get ready for some muy tasty taco conversations. Welcome everybody. As you know, we're, we're here for the bean and cheese battle royale. Today's tacos of Texas is being recorded live in San Antonio, Texas. We are at Jaime's Place hosting the top three eateries that you voted for in the 2023 bean and cheese battle royale.

We started with a list of 16 and down to those And finally, Well, I don't know about that, but you know, Bean and cheese could be pretty barato, right? Yeah. So we had four categories. We had old school mom and pop shops. We had drive thru edition. We have restaurants and food trucks. We had each of these on a bracket.

We did two rounds of online voting. And now we're here for the final battle between Tacos El Rey. Everybody give it up for Tacos El Rey, the original donut shop and Rosa's Kitchen. The winner today will be selected by our beautiful and sweaty jury right here. We have Stephanie Guerra of Puro Pinche. We have Nidia Huizar of Barbacoa Apparel and Richard Diaz as well from Barbacoa Apparel.

And of course we're gonna have the Gente's Choice Awards which you will be voting for. The winners will be crowned with this custom made crown made by El Guapo Fabrication and Design. So thank you partners, not only Barbacoa Apparel and Puro Pinche for coming together and believing in the dream. We couldn't do this without Jaime Macias from Jaime's Blaze.

What's up? Y'all proud to be here in the west side? All right. Here's the thing, San Antonio. We're gathered here today in honor of the bean and cheese taco, or as I call it, the people's taco. It's simple, delicious, and different from one taco to the next, with plenty of protein and energy it gives you when you eat it.

And I definitely call it the Mexican protein bar. Anybody had their Mexican protein bar today? It's something that's affordable, something that's on the go, but, like, you always had a pot of beans at home, didn't you? Right? And then some tortillas, and a little bit of the quesito. It's just something that, you know, you can make in a large batch.

Uh, and our vendors are here today, our finalists, and they're gonna have plenty, uh, for you to taste. The bean and cheese now has secured a special place in so many of our corazones. And so, thank you all for being here. Again, my name is Mando Rayo. I'm a taco journalist and host of the Tacos of Texas.

podcast. We're going to take a quick break, but when we come back, we're going to have our guest jury panel come up here and talk about the bean and cheese tacos. 

So let's get ready to rumble.

Oh, it's taco time. And now here's a word from our sponsors from me. Vamos a Chucotown con Visit El Paso. It's the hometown of this taco journalist. On every corner of El Paso, you will find a variety of delicious cuisines that will suit any budget. From authentic Mexican restaurants established several decades ago, to up and coming award winning restaurants reinventing traditional dishes with a modern twist.

El Paso's food and drink scene is recognized for its range of flavors. The birthplace of the margarita. Few things go better with El Paso's authentic selection of Mexican food than Ice cold margaritas. With the introduction of the margarita in the 1940s, just south of the border, the tangy and sweet drink soon became a staple in restaurants and bars across the region.

Follow El Paso's Margarita Trail by visiting one or more of these iconic establishments and treat yourself to some of the best margaritas you can find. The Kentucky Club, the world famous Kentucky Club, takes pride in being one of the oldest bars in Ciudad Juarez, Mexico, and claiming to be the birthplace of the margarita.

Craft breweries make up an exciting and growing segment of El Paso's culinary culture, with places like Dead Beach, Old Sheepdog Brewery, Blazing Tree and others, beer fans and foodies can enjoy refreshment and light bites at one of the many breweries in town. Muchas gracias to our friends at Visit El Paso for sponsoring this podcast episode.

Follow Visit El Paso on Instagram and Facebook at Visit El Paso or on their website at visitelpaso. com.

Our first guest's intro was cut because we lost power when she introduced herself, so I'm going to introduce her now. Today's guest is Stephanie Guerra from Puro Pinche, based in San Antonio, Texas. Stephanie is an experienced consultant offering creative services such as social media, marketing, event production, content creation, y mas.

Stephanie founded Puro Pinche at PuroPinche. com in 2010. To help celebrate and support San Antonio's vibrant cultural scene, Puro Pinche's recognition has made her the go to person for when and what is happening in South Texas. Puro Pinche's social media channels constantly aggregate and share need to know information about culture and events happening to its audience of over 60, 000 people.

So the power was cut because we're doing a live event and it's like a hundred plus degrees out here in San Antonio The gateway to South Texas. That's right. So we're gonna be in and out And the competition's even hotter. That's right. That's right. All right, so let's go ahead and go back to barbacoa apparel Nydia, well, let's start with you.

Why don't you introduce yourself and tell us what your role is at barbacoa apparel? 

Hi there, thanks Mondo. Um, I'm Nidia and I'm the designer, co owner of Barabaco Apparel, the designer, and I do social media stuff too. 

Nice. Richard. My name is Richard Diaz, also co owner. I do events, printing, a little bit of everything.

Nice, nice. And so I gotta ask each of you, have you had a bean and cheese today? 

I have not, but I know somebody who has. I did. I actually, 

I have to confess, I had one right before, um, the event. Cause I was hungry, so. Good, good. Yeah, I had to. 

Yes, I had a bean and cheese taco today, but no, I won't say where I got it from.

Oh, come on. It's not on the finals? Los finales? It was one of 

the, it was one of the top 16. 

Oh, okay. Good, good, good, good, good. Well, San Antonio is known for many things, uh, but definitely the bean and cheese. Stephanie, let's start with you. Why is the bean and cheese taco so important to the city of San Antonio?

I think that the bean and cheese taco is a great representation of the people of San Antonio, right? Like, San Antonio people are hard workers. We have all different ways of getting things done, and we make sure we get them done. And I think that, you know, everybody has beans in their house, like you said, a pot of beans.

Everyone can find a different type of cheese that they love and then you got to put all the love into making the fresh tortillas. Um, and San Antonio works hard to make those all come together. Um, and especially since we are a predominantly Mexican American city. You know, we love our tacos, but bean and cheese always reminds me of comfort, of home, of my abuelas making bean and cheese tacos or going to our favorite taqueria down the street.

I grew up actually going to one on commerce for the majority of my life, so I'm not too far away. Um, and I just think like bean and cheese is the perfect balance and will tell you if a Mexican restaurant is good. 

Hey, that's, that's, that's right. Nia, what do you say about that? 

Well, how can I expand on that?

I don't even know. Stephanie said it all. I definitely think that bean and cheese tacos, they're an affordable. If you have a large family, a lot of, a lot of us come from large families. That's like a really great way to stretch out a comfort food. That's packed in protein, like you said, and it's just delicious.

And part of, you know, Tex Mex. 

Yeah. I mean, who made your first beaten cheese for you growing up? 

They were in the top 16. Lupitas. I lived like within walking distance to that restaurant and my first memory is my grandma telling me to avoid stepping on broken beer bottles as we walked over, which is pretty sweet and it's so good.

You know, it's a soft food, so it's perfect for kids and it's just, I don't know, it's home. 

Home. What about you, Richard? Tell me about your love for bean and cheese, and when did it start? 

I was introduced to bean and cheese as a kid. I think, like, for, you know, a lot of kids can be picky when they eat, and I think bean and cheese is a safe taco to have, so it's a good introduction.

for kids. I remember growing up, my mom would make it. We would go to a lot of restaurants on the west side. I think Elena's on Zazamora was probably one of my first, but there's so many restaurants on the west side. And yeah, it's uh, I would, I definitely judge a restaurant based on their bean and cheese taco.

Nice, nice. Now let's talk about like some technical aspects of the bean and cheese. Uh, you know, when I grew up, I grew up definitely tacos and burritos too, because I'm an original from El Paso. Chucotan represent. What's up? And for me, it was the bean to the cheese ratio is muy importante, right? It was funny because I was like, go to a restaurant, and you know, most, most bean and cheese look very similar, but when we got home, they had a different color, like because we used that Munster cheese.

They became like white beans. Oh my gosh. 

I, I think we should poll the audience and see. What kind of cheese they like, right? Yellow or white. Is there another one? A third option? Mix. Mixed cheese 

mix. 

Okay, who can hear us out there? Who wants to vote really quick? All right. So if you grew up with yellow cheese, let me hear you.

Who grew up with yellow cheese in their bean and cheese? All right. All right. Okay. Who grew up with white cheese in their bean and cheese tacos? Alright, well there you 

have 

it. Oh, there's one person. Maybe only 

the West Texans, who knows. Hey, 

I don't know. Richard, let's start with you. What do you look for in your perfect bean and cheese?

I think, uh, it's all about the beans. Some places make it with like chorizo in their beans. And actually one of the restaurants that was in the top 16 was one of my personal favorites. Who was it? 

Call them out. 

Taqueria Chapala Jalisco. Oh, yeah, yeah. On McCullough. Is it? No? The Goth Taqueria. 

The Goth Taqueria.

Yeah, yeah. Sin 

13. 

Used to be an industrial club. Now it's a taqueria. Oh, oh, 

okay. 

But they just do really good beans. Um, and then the cheese is great. And then I, I always add bacon. I feel like bacon just adds that perfect like saltiness to it. Love it. Love it. 

Do you guys like, uh, a good bean and cheese on corn?

Yes. 100%. All right, Nidia, tell us, give, give us your statement on corn, uh, bean and cheese on corn tortillas. 

Okay, so I, I feel like we might be in the minority, right? Like, flour tortillas are very important in San Antonio cuisine, right? But corn tortillas, like when you, when you heat them up, it brings out like other flavors that really complements the bean and the cheese.

And so anytime I pick up. Bean and cheese tacos, I usually ask for them on corn. 

Nice. Okay, hey. 

And corn is the original tortilla, 

right Mondo? That's true, that's true. You're right, you're right, you're right, you're right, you're right. There's certain tacos that I like with corn. You know what I mean? Like a good al pastor.

Migas taco. Or carnitas, migas. But there's some that, like, I gotta have it on flour, you know what I mean? Yes. And, you know, where else can you come and get some good flour tortillas but San Antonio? 

My mom, Rosie, says She will not eat the bean and cheese if it's not on a fluffy tortilla. So, you know, who loves fluffy 

tortillas?

Fluffy tortillas! What's up? There she is. We'll call her La Fluffy. So I like, you know, you mentioned a good chorizo, right? Chorizo with the beans mixed together. But not just like assembly line, you know what I mean? Not on top of each other, but it has to be mixed in. That's kind of the way I like it. It's like, because it brings in all the flavors, don't you think?

Exactly, yeah. It has to be mixed in. I don't know if like other places put other things in their beans. 

Is it still a bean and cheese if you add other things? Like people 

kept trying to add. People's bean, cheese, and bacon tacos in there, but that was not what we were voting on. We were not voting on people's bacon.

That's a whole other category. Or avocado. People were like, 

oh, can we put avocado? That's a way I like mine. Yeah. Right? I think 

there's a lot of vegetarian people that can eat bean and cheese tacos. Sin 

grasa. Sin grasa. On corn 

tortillas. On corn tortillas. But they won't put the bacon in there, right? So we can't include bacon.

What would you say the per capita of bean and cheese tacos that are here in the city of San Antonio? 

I want to say that there's a taqueria on every corner. So we could probably get like 500 different kinds of bean and cheese tacos in San Antonio, but I could be exaggerating. I don't know. That sounds about right.

Yeah, 

definitely in the hundreds, for 

sure. 

Yeah, yeah. No, I believe 500. 500 is a good number. We'll go with that. Survey says 500! 

Ah, ding, ding, ding, ding, ding, ding, 

ding! You are absolutely correct. I'm gonna throw a, uh, curveball here. Do black beans count on a bean and cheese taco? 

I Let's ask the audience though first, see what they think.

Alright, 

audience, audience, what do y'all think? Listen up, listen up. We got another, another question. Yes 

or no? Black beans, no? Are you all traditionalists? 

We're very much traditionalists, yes. 

Yeah, I just have to say I won't eat a taco with black beans, but it's not my go to. Yeah, at all. 

All right. All right.

That's, I 

don't actually know where I can find a bean and cheese taco with black 

beans. You'll have to drive to Austin.

So what about like the tortilla, the base of the tortilla? It's super important for any taco, right? Tell me like what you all look for in a tortilla that makes it just spectacular bean and cheese. Nidia, we'll go with you. 

All right. If we're talking flour tortilla, it's got to be homemade. It's got to have that kind of flowery, like leave a little powdery.

Yeah. And fluffy. 

Yeah. 

That that's my criteria. 

Perfect. 

I think that the tortillas need to be hot. So I don't know if that's another battle, but If I get served, you know, hot beans, cold cheese, and a cold tortilla, that just kills it for me. So, I need everything to be warm and, and comfy. 

Well, you came to the right event for that because it is hot out here.

You could probably warm up a good tortilla just on the, on the concrete down there. 

I do see the lines are getting full and everybody is eating the tacos. 

Alright! Any final thoughts? I had this idea around this peanut cheese, but I was like, yeah, it was a natural thing for me to be in San Antonio, but why do you think it's so important here?

I think San Antonio likes to hold on to, uh, the traditional values of being at home. When you get into fancy tacos, not everybody can make fancy tacos at home, right? Like, not everybody can afford the ingredients, or knows how to season things, or knows, you know, the right cuts of meat to get. Everybody can make a bean and cheese taco en la casa, right?

So, um, San Antonio is probably the king and queen of ay comida en la casa. We like to eat at home a lot. So I think, you know, it's a, it's a perfect place to bring it home, hometown San Antonio. I know we have made national news in history, you know, for bean and cheese tacos and just the Mexican culture that we have there.

And I'm glad we're hanging on to it. And I think we should do this again next year and have it even bigger and better. So, let's do it. 

I know we kind of talked about bean and cheese tacos being some of the very early introductions to Tex Mex that a lot of us, you know, have. And I think it's the nostalgia.

People really like comfort food and they really like Um, being reminded of like happy times in their lives, you know, and, and for me, when I think of San Antonio, we're like a very nostalgic city as, um, a few years ago, we came out with a bean and cheese shirt, and that was like an instant hit, and it was really popular for parents to give their kids that shirt in that onesie, and so it's just, I don't know, it's family, it's, it's comfort food, and 

It's a lot of kids introduction to Tex Mex food.

It's very simple, but it's delicious. That taco specifically crosses generations. I mean, it's so easy to introduce that to your kids. And then, you know, they can get into, branch out into other, other tacos. 

You know, speaking about kind of those traditions that we have at home, I think it's super important because at one point, you know, maybe in our parents generations or even in our grandparents generations, People were shamed to bring tacos from home to eat at school because they couldn't afford like, uh, white bread and bologna and all that.

You know what I mean? And so what did we eat? We had bean and cheese. Yeah. And that's a beautiful thing. It's our 

ancestors passing that love down to us. 

That's right. That's right. Well, I want to thank so much, uh, our panelists today. Uh, you'll, you'll now be crowned as, uh, bean and cheese experts. Uh, 

I think I've eaten enough to, you know, yeah, you 

qualify, you qualify.

Awesome. Well, thanks so much for being here. And now we're going to take another short break. And during the break, we want to make sure we hear from some of you as what you look for in a bean and cheese taco.

All right. We're here in the locker room, you know, uh, sweating, sweating. Todos sudados y, y, y sweaty, you know what I mean? And, uh, we're here to find out like what motivates you to become the best bean and cheese taco maker of all of San Antonio!

Alright, here we go, here we go. We got our finalists. Tell us your name and who you're with and then give us your best, like, strategy of how you're gonna win this 

bean and cheese battle royale. My name is Alejandro Hernandez, and I'm with the Original Donut Shop. Man, we got the best donuts, if y'all can tell!

Man, we got the best donuts! The best original donuts. 

Hi, my name is Paloma, and I'm with Rosa's Kitchen. And, the way we're gonna win is cause, not only are we representing the best state in Mexico, Coahuila, we're representing 78207, our hood. So, go ahead, make some noise, come on! Na, 

na, na, na, na, na. My name is Andrew Arredondo.

I'm with Tacos Array. The way we're going to win, we put out hot food, fast, consistent. Yeah, that's pretty much it. We're going to win this. I already got the crown on, so it's just in my way. He actually does. He 

has a crown on. But, you know, it's from the dollar store. 

Alright, 

alright. What makes your bean and cheese different from any other place in San Antonio?

They're the tortillas are homemade. And of course, uh, everything's made there and it's fresh. They're the best little tacos, mini cheese tacos, man. 

Original donut shop. 

All right. What makes our bean and cheese? The best bean and cheese is that not only are our tortillas handmade, no nada de maquina, nothing like that.

My mom is back there, you know, with the palo, just going ham on the tortilla, on the masa, um, cooking it up on the grill. And we have the best beans cooked with, you know, some of that good bacon grease. Y'all know what I'm talking about. 

Woo! Nice! Our beans are cooked four to six hours every day.

Everything's hot, tortillas homemade. Like I said, as long as we're putting out fast food. You're solid, right? Right? Alright, everybody! 

Everybody give a round of applause for our finalists!

Que Onda Taco World, we're here with Jaime Macias at Jaime's place in San Antonio. Uh, well, first I want to say thank you for opening up your space. 

Oh, it was a, it's a pleasure hosting, uh, United Tacos of America, Tacos of Texas podcast. Thank y'all for considering us first and foremost. Uh, really excited to host such a wonderful event.

Thank you, Mando. 

Yeah, no, well, we're here to do the Bean and Cheese Battle Royale. And tell me from your own words, why is bean and cheese so important to San Antonio? 

Well, you know, it really is a staple of our gente, right? I'm being Back in the day, you know, you, you, you ate frijoles, you know, and, you know, it's been a staple in the household for so many years.

And, you know, we, somebody somewhere added cheese to them and they realized what a wonderful combination it was. And now, I mean It's it's protein filled, you know, you get some dairy, you know, I mean, what else do you want? And well, 

you know, I call it the Mexican protein bar, 

you know, I think that's such a wonderful phrase I think you ought to make a sticker out of that.

I'm really I'm really well tell us about Jaime's place What are you trying to do here? Well, so we're we opened up October 9th of 2020 there were some changes happening into the west side, which has for the most part been a a An area where has has seen a lot of disinvestment, but it's percolating with new interest.

And, uh, we're here preserving the cultura at Jaime's place built for the barrio. And of course, beyond for our brothers and sisters from Austin, Texas, you know, come on down where it's real. And, uh, and yeah, the beer is cold. No, that's that's what I'm 

here for. What's up? Taco world. All right, we're back here at a very VIP exclusive.

spot of Jaime's place. We're here with some taco lovers, bean and cheese. So tell me your names. And what do you look for in a bean and cheese? My name 

is Rosie Guerra. I'm Pluto Pinche's mom. Woo woo! Represent! 

Ralph Guerra, I'm Papa Pinche, is what they say. Love it, love it! So tell, Papa Pinche, tell me, like, You have a, you have a number one taco?

No, I had a number one taco. My mother passed away last year. That was the best taco, bean and cheese taco ever, so I'm looking for the number two best, uh, bean and cheese taco. Uh, we have a good place, uh, it's called Elizabeth's. It's on Timber Hill, uh, on the northwest side of town. Of course, there's many Uh, taco places that we haven't eaten, so we're not sure, but uh, Elizabeth's Taco Hut is really good.

And me, well, my thing is pretty big. I have to have a really fluffy tortilla. I have to have some refried, refried beans, and then the cheese, when you put it on it, it has to be really melted, really good in order to be a great taco. So, I like, actually, I like quite a bit of places. But there's a little place called La Barca off of ProBant and Steve's.

Uh, Elizabeth's also is great. Uh, the taqueria by my house makes really good refried beans with the cheese and all. Fluffy tortillas. And there's just a bunch of places, but like I said, mine, if you don't have a fluffy tortilla, I don't want to eat it. 

Oh! Ha, ha, ha. And, and it's Double refried, right? You said, cause you said refried, refried.

Well, thank you all for coming out. And, uh, uh, we'll see, we'll see what happens at the end of the bean and cheese battle Royale.

Oh, it's taco time. And now here's a word from our sponsors from me. Located deep in the heart of South Texas, Laredo is the beginning of the Lone Star State and a travel experience that is American, Texan, and Mexican all in one. This location lends itself to a perfect blend of culture, language, culinary influence, and ambiance that can only be found in deep in the heart of South Texas.

This small Spanish villa was founded in 1755 on the banks of the Rio Grande. Walk around the historic downtown and discover landmarks that are significant for both Laredo and Texas history. Some landmarks include San Agustin Plaza, Republic of the Rio Grande Museum, and San Agustin Cathedral. Laredo's warm weather creates a perfect ambiance for a weekend of fun and relaxation.

Mexican, Tex Mex, and just about anything else has a Laredo flair that sets it apart. So come for the authentic Mexican food and stay for the flavors. Whatever you crave. You're sure to find an amazing array of enticing selections. Muchas gracias to our friends at Visit Laredo for sponsoring this podcast episode.

Follow Visit Laredo on Instagram and Facebook at Visit Laredo, Texas, or on their website, www. visitlaredo. com.

All right, here we go. So everybody's going to get a finalist certificate, as you can see right here. It's very fancy. You can't even, like, fold it. It's hard. Uh, first, uh, finalist is Rosa's Kitchen. Second finalist is Tacos El Rey

and of course the original donut taco shop.

All right, here we go. Second runner up is Rosas Kitchen.

First runner up is Original Donut Shop.

And the winner is Y Sigo Siendo El Rey! Tacos El Rey!

Alright, come over here and come say a few words. I want to say thank you to San Antonio for coming out. Uh, our faithful customers in the Edgewood District. I know we're like the forgotten side of town. But, we'll let San Antonio know we do have good cuisine on our side of town. I'd like to thank all of y'all.

Congratulations. So here's the thing is, everybody's a wiener today. No, because out of over 30 restaurants, you are the top three finalists. So congratulations to all of you. And thank you, San Antonio, for making this a very hot one. Very sudado and beautiful Beanie Cheese 

Battle Royale!

Thank you!

Thank you, San Antonio, and thanks to our panel of judges. Stephanie Guerra, Puro Pinche, Richard Diaz of Barbacoa Apparel, and Nidia Wissar! And thank you to the whole team at Barbacoa Apparel, including, uh, Catherine Contreras Sanchez and Matt Contreras! What's up? Thank you to our bracket consultant, Mr.

Dillon Welch. Special thanks to Priscilla Gutierrez, our clutch producer for the day! And thank you to our final three participant restaurants, Tacos El Rey, Original Donut Shop, and Rosa's Kitchen. Thank you. Thank you to our sponsor and host, HiMisplay, the fantastic venue, which we are here today in the West Side.

Thank you to Enwapo Fabrication and Design for creating this beautiful crown. I want to give a shout out to other participating San Antonio eateries who are really close to being in the final four bean and cheese. Lupita's Mexican Restaurant, Taqueria Chapada Jalisco, Eddie's Taco House, and Teca Molino.

This has been the Tacos of Texas podcast, developed and produced by Identity Productions. If you enjoyed today's episode and are craving more taco content. Go to our website at www. identity. productions. Or follows on Instagram, TikTok, Facebook and YouTubes at Identity Productions at United Tacos of America.

This is your host, the Cheesy Mando BA Tacos.

Now let's go back to our tackle VIP lounge to talk to the winner. All right, we are here with the big winners, Tacos El Rey, Andrew and Andrew, the two Andrews. Andrew, tell me, what does it mean for you to win the bean and cheese battle royale, the crown, the actual 

crown? Oh, you know, there's been years that our customers have said that we have the best beans in San Antonio.

It means the world to us. Um, it's years of hard work. I've been in that restaurant since I could walk, since I was about his age. And it's just, it's a great feeling. It's a great feeling. 

And, uh, did you know your daddy was gonna win, uh, a crown today? 

Yeah. 

Why? 

Because he always, because he's the best dad.

Aww, that's so sweet. I love it. I love it. What does it mean for your team? 

We have a lot of restaurants on the west, on our side of town, Edgewood, that we're kind of like the forgotten side of town. Um, we don't get a lot of interviews. There's not a lot of camera crews on our side of town. Um, but there's a lot of good food and there's a lot of loyal customers that, that come every day before work.

Uh, for dinner. Um, and it's not just our restaurants. It's all the restaurants, um, in our area that we're kind of just forgotten about, but we're still there chugging along and putting out good food day in, day out. 

So you're like a comeback kid, right? 

I would say so. 

I love it.

In the next Proximo Tacos of Texas. Mexican hands, the strength, the tenderness and techniques and how recipes have been developed in kitchens by our matriarchs. 

The Tacos a Texas podcast is presented by Identity Productions in partnership with KUT and KUTX Studios. Our host and producer is Mando Rayo.

Our audio is mixed by Nicholas Worthen and Ever Calderon. Our story producer is me, Sharon Arteaga. And our creative producer is Dennis Burnett. Music was created by Peligrosa in Austin, Texas and King Benny Productions located in the Quinto Barrio of Houston.
