Hey, taco fans. What's the longest word in Espanol y'all ready for this?

What's up taco world? I'm taco journalist, Mando Rayo, and welcome to the tacos of Texas podcast. Season four, the cuatro. Produced by Identity Productions in partnership with KUT and KUTX Studios. And we're back exploring taco culture in Texas through the eyes of the people in the Lone Star State. So grab your cleats, grow out that soccer mullet, and get ready for some muy tasty taco conversations.

So

But first, tacos. In today's episode of Tacos of Texas, We're taking a taco tour up to El Partido de Austin FC. On the way, we'll talk to taco fans, find the messed up taco joints, and see how Comida y Gente have welcomed Austin FC to Central Texas. In this episode, our guests include Joseph Gomez with Con Todo Austin, a James Beard nominee who's bringing his Rio Grande Valley Sabores to Austin.

Tony Avila, co founder of One Taco Taqueria, who has multiple locations in Austin and is inside the stadium. Chef Sam Boisjoliet, senior executive chef with Austin FC, who works on feeding a crowd of 20, 000 fans per event. We'll also check out the taco scene at the Sonoco gas station, right outside the stadium.

And that's what's on today's episode of Tacos of Texas.

Okay, mi gente, here's a little bit about Austin FC. It was founded in 2018. The club began to play in 2021, and it's the only professional team in Austin. Their home stadium is Q2 Stadium in North Austin. Since their inception, they've been loco about locos, handing out scarves and merch, inviting muralists.

Singers and DJs, they've got a strong supporter section, including Ta na ta taaaan! La Murga! Los Verdes! Austin Anthem! Y más! Well, there's a variety of foods at any stadium. I mean, who doesn't love a good hot dog at a baseball game? But you know what? Because of the cultura, our proximity to Mexico, and I mean, to be honest, if you're in Texas, you might as well be Mexican.

All right, that's what I'm saying. So you have that, you have the people, and you got not only the taco fans, but the soccer, the futboleros because you can see them out there if you drive down Mopac, you can see them off the fields of Silco Park. And we're talking about that perfect combo. Futbol, the OG futbol, not to be confused with the American version, which I think they call it soccer.

And tacos, of course, it's a perfect match. From the connection to the cultura, to the taco fanatics. and the influence of Mexico being so close. It's a perfect combination and you could see it on the path to Austin FC. Whether it's a little taqueria down the street in a gas station, the Sonico with about five or six taquerias, the pop ups that happen outside breweries, you could see it all and inside the stadium too.

So that's what we're gonna get into today because Fans, taco fans, don't you want to feel what it tastes like? We're here for it all! Vamos Verde!

Vamos a Chugotown con Visit El Paso. It's the hometown of this taco journalist. Get ready for the thrill of El Paso Locomotive FC. Founded in 2018, our team brings top tier soccer to downtown El Paso at Southwest university park. Join us for the 2024 season. Now through October 26, experience world class soccer and unmatched service.

We made it to the conference quarterfinals in 2023, and this year we're going for more. Bring Toda La Familia and meet Ozzy, our soccer loving bat mascot and join the movement with hashtag Vamos Locos. Get your tickets now at eplocomotivefc. com. See you at the park. Muchas gracias to our friends at Visit El Paso for sponsoring this podcast episode.

Follow Visit El Paso on Instagram and Facebook at visitelpaso or on their website at visitelpaso. com. Our first guest is Joseph Gomez, a 2024 James Beard nominee, and the creative force behind Con Todo Austin, a vibrant taco shop. outside of Sal's Brewery as the founder of Contodo ATX. He blends flavors inspired by his upbringing on the fronteras with innovative techniques from the Rio Grande Valley to prestigious nomination.

Gomez champions fair treatment for laborers and migrant workers while delivering culinary excellence. And I think that's mexcellent. We got Contodo, Contodo, Austin Contodo, ATX. What do you call it? It's Contodo, Contodo, uh Cilantro, cebolla. Tacarilla, comida sin fronteras. Órale, órale, chido. Well, Joseph, you know, thanks for being on the podcast.

Tell me a little bit about where you're from and how you got to Austin. Well, sure. So, I am from the Rio Grande Valley. I've been cooking since I was like 15. You know, to help my parents out with, you know, the bills and stuff like that, you know. All through high school and college as well. Um, just kind of stuck with it and moved to Austin in 2011 and I've just been here since.

Yeah. Nice, nice. And we're up here in North Boston, right outside the Salad brewery. What are the, what is, what are the flavors that you're trying to introduce to people up here? So basically just the flavors of the Rogan Valley, Northeastern Mexico, along the lines of the Fronteras. Um, just, you know, bringing.

That flavor over here, uh, when I moved over here, it was very difficult to find. Like what, what kind of, like, can you be specific about the styles? Yeah, I mean, so it's, it varies so much. Like, when you go to the Rio Grande Valley, it's made up of five different counties, right? So, in those five different counties, they all vary.

They're all very different. If you go eat somewhere in Brownsville, Bistecasilo, Matamoros, Tatamorejas. Like, different things, like very large flour tortillas. Yeah, they're huge. Sort of like a lot of corn. There's a lot of TAs. I mean, a lot of, uh, tortillas over there, you're closer to, to Matamoros and you go to Macallan and you'll find things completely different.

Yeah. You know, so it's a bunch of different, you know, flavors and uh, you know, techniques and stuff like that. We try to definitely kind of almost like go back in time a little bit uhhuh and use things that maybe used to be used when, uh, Texas was Mexico. Like using mis, not just the wood, but like the, the pods, you know?

Yeah. We use that. We incorporate that into our torina. And to our gorditas on the weekends. And we'll make different beverages out of it or sometimes desserts. Um, so it just varies, yeah. You know, when I got to Austin, I was like, I'm from El Paso, and right there on the border, Juarez, El Paso, right? And I was like, Whoa, what is this watered down Mexican food?

And so what was your take on Austin, and why did you stick to the roots of where you're from? So I started coming to Austin because I have family that lived here, but when I moved to Austin, like, I miss home. Like, I miss, like, good Mexican food and, you know, just thick food from where I'm from. Like, srocasera stuff.

You know, guisos. Um, my mom made guisos all the time. All different kinds. So, that's something I really missed. So, we'll do, like, things like that on the menu as well every now and then. But, um, it was difficult to find something that kind of took me back. Because to me, we are TA in Austin, but we're not an Austin ria.

You know what I mean? Yeah, totally. Like we're like most, to me, the most, to me, the best RIAs in Austin, they're not like Austin Tacos. Right. To me, an Austin taco was something like Taco Deli. Yeah. Yeah. Torch cheese and not like talking trash. It's just, you know, that's what tacos mean. Yeah, exactly. Um, so we're not that at all.

Yeah. And so what does that look like for you on your menu? Uh, so, Pisteque Estilo Matamoros, uh, we have And those are the small taquitos? So, back home, they'll be very small. But all of our tacos, uh, they're the same size. They're about, maybe on a 5 inch corn tortilla. So, they're a little bigger. Um, the difference between our Estilo Matamoros and the ones back home is, uh, they'll do, like, uh, a piece of aguacate.

And we do guacamole on there just because it's quicker for us, for service. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Nice, nice. Um, and aside from that, on the weekends we do machacado, which is like very I love machacado, man. It's one of my favorite things, for sure. We do a version of the Q taco. Oh yeah. From the valley, you know?

Yeah. We call it the vo taco. Shout. Shout out to LTC. Yeah. Stripes. . Um, uh, our version's called the Vo Taco Vo. Yeah, I have to it . Uh, what else? Uh, but you do more. Yes, too. So we had 'em on the menu. Yeah. Last summer. But we ran through an issue with our purveyor. Oh, okay. So, we'll be doing it, for this summer, we'll be doing it as a special.

Oh, okay. It won't be on the menu, really, just because it's difficult. So, what are moyecas for somebody that doesn't know? Moyeca is the thymus gland of the cow. They're very, like, popular back home. I mean, it being also a very, like, inexpensive cut of meat. Yeah. When I was younger, you know, it was accessible.

Same thing with, like, lengua and cachete, cabeza. Like, all these different things that were once very inexpensive. Now they're, like, popularized. Yeah, they're popular. So, now they're very expensive. Yeah. But, so yeah. Mojezo, the time is done with the cow. Uh, we cook them. Um, just on the barria with mesquite.

And they're super good. Oh, I love them, I love them. They're very tender. Yeah, yeah, I love them right, they're amazing. You cooked them up for us a while ago, and they're probably, hands down, one of my favorites. So at the, went through and he said, Si, andale, andale, andale. Este, so we're here in this mostly kind of industrial part of, uh, North Austin over here on Burnett Road, and you have some breweries, a lot of tile, uh, companies out here.

So what brought you to this location? Um, it was just kind of random. Um, I just had a connection through a friend that knew the people here at Solis. And I was like, it could be a good opportunity, so I just jumped on it. Mm hmm. And, and you got here, um, right around the time that, uh, Asensic, uh, had its season opener, no?

Yeah. How was that? Uh, very busy. Yeah? Yeah. I mean, anytime there's a game, it's very busy. We have to line down the parking lot. Yeah. And so, it was kind of like, opportunity meets, like, chance, type of thing, right? Yeah, definitely chance, because it's kind of, like, out here, you know? And it's hidden, like, we're not, we don't have street visibility at all.

Yeah. Um, so, I was kind of worried about it. But, people caught on, and, you know, we really make a good taco, I believe. You know, we put a lot of attention to our tortillas, the corn, where we get the corn for the tortillas, you know, all of our ingredients. We're very, just, like, you know. Pay attention to that.

So, I think we, we try to have important conversations about the food and like just go through that back home. Yeah, for sure, for sure. Talk about different things that people might not want to talk about sometimes. Yeah. And I think those things are important. Like what kind of things? Like migrant workers.

Yeah, yeah. And importance. My family, uh, come from, I'm a son of migrant workers. And, um, you know, they worked very hard from when they were very young until, you know, whenever, you know, I was born or whatever. You know, they would go from Brownsville or Matamoros to, like. Michigan or Nauvoo, Illinois to pick grapes, cotton, different fruits, like all kinds of things and sometimes they'll come back empty handed and that sucks, like, you know what I mean?

And a lot of people, a lot of microwaves aren't treated fairly, you know, they're always working in poor conditions, whether it's hot, cold, whatever it may be, or with like dangerous chemicals that people put on the food that we eat. Yeah. Yeah, yeah. Yeah. I mean, people that look like us, too, bro. That's the reality of things.

Those conversations need to be, like, you know, had. Yeah, yeah, yeah. And so, you know, I think part of that conversation is introducing people to, like, the style of food that you're cooking, verdad? And so, we're, you know, As you're looking at, you know, the Austin FC fans around here, there's a lot of tech, uh, companies out here too.

There's a domain not to be followed. I guess, what's their take on your tacos? Um, I think at the beginning people were kind of confused. People were just like, we don't know this. Because in Austin it's all, you know, like tacos from DeFe or like Jalisco style tacos. Yeah. Um, we're just like, you know, gonna go Austin style tacos also.

So. People were just kind of confused, but it started catching on with me talking about things and in the end time Someone in the press was you like a story on us. I'm going to Um, I would you know talk about these things so I think people started You know learning about them and we get a mix of clientele like We get a bunch of people that come to the, to the brewery here.

The people that come from the stadium, um, or from the domain. But then there's a bunch of gente on this area, like, it's predominantly Latino on this side. Down Rutland over here, Austin, and then there's a lot. Yeah, yeah, it's all Raza. Yeah, and there's all the taquerios over there. The best Mexican food is over here, for me at least, in Austin.

So we get a lot of mixture of people. And so, um, our tacos aren't like, The most inexpensive tacos. Sure. But they're not super expensive either. Yeah. I mean, with the corn that we purchase, it's more expensive than most corn. And then all the labor that goes into like, Yeah. Cooking and, and next, next month.

Yeah, yeah, yeah, for sure. And all this great labor is, and we want to pay our workers the best that we can. So our tacos aren't super, super cheap. You know what I mean? Yeah, yeah, yeah. And I get the economy of a taco as well. But, so if there's someone that comes in and maybe can't afford something, We do like, kind of, work with them, you know, Give them a few extra, or, You know, I'll give him like a hinted discount kind of thing.

No, no, no. Round discount. It's an important thing to do. Especially being in this area right now. This area is about to get really gentrified as well. There's, you know, many high rises popping up nearby. They're about to build some things nearby as well. So it's going to, prices are going up. And so, you know, just like the east side, this might happen on this side as well.

But let's talk about your journey once you set up here. And then it was the same year that Austin NFC had their, their inaugural year, you know, what's been your journey since then? Like, what's the impact, I would say, on your business? Of the stadium? Yeah. Um, it's been good for sure. Like, during the season it's very busy.

Like, it brings a big crowd, it brings people, maybe that are in town to see a game. Um, that has never had our tacos before, you know, and they were able to come and try them. So it's been a big help for sure with business and just keeping us busy during the soccer season. Um, yeah, it's been good. Nice. And so what, um, recently you were, uh, nominated for James Beard.

Yeah. So, how was, how was, how was that as a taquero? Unreal. Um, I'm very grateful for sure. Like, you know. It's definitely something that I'm proud of my team for like they've helped me out so much like without them Like I won't be able to do those things or we wouldn't get nominated for those things Like I can't do this by myself at all.

No one could do anything by themselves. Like it's silly. Yeah Yeah, you know without them. I'm nothing so it was just wild like I woke up and had a bunch of texts and DMS that Uh, that was nominated. I DM'd you, bro. Yeah, you did, you did. Felicidades. Yeah, thank you. Um, a lot of families were like, what is happening?

And I was like, I don't know. That's funny. Because I was telling you before, like, you're growing up in the valley, like, I don't know what it is, but this is the, I guess some of the culture there, you just feel like you're not going to get out of there. And then when you do, you still feel sometimes like you're not going to Get further in life where you're not going to win certain, not that winning things matters, but like, you know, just getting head recognition.

Yeah. And so getting that, when I, when I saw it, I was just like, is that real? Yeah. Like it almost felt kind of undeserving, but at the same time, like, no, like I deserve that. Yeah, man. I've worked so hard. I put so much into this. Like my guys have helped out so much. You know, other friends and family that have like just come and just like thrown hands just to help out because they wanted to.

Be a part of it. Like that's all because of them. You know what I mean? Yeah. So, but definitely a huge honor. Nice, nice, nice. So, the final question is, um, for someone who doesn't know what contolo is, what is that? Yeah, and why did you do it? Why did you name your taco contolo? So, contolo just means with everything and to me it's the best way to have a taco is just with everything that it comes with.

A lot of times people don't want onions on there or cilantro and I get it. Some people don't like certain things, you know, it's preference. But that's what makes the taco like. You know, the crunchiness of the onion and the sharpness kind of cuts through like some of the fat of some meat of some meats, you know So it's just all these different things, you know, having a taco con todo is just the best way to have it.

That's right That's right. Well, I'm ready to have a taco con todo bro. I'm gonna go order some food. Let's do it. Orale. Muchas gracias and congratulations. Thank you. And, uh Tell me you're from the RGV without telling me you're from the RGV. Well, all you gotta do is order a pirata taco. That's right. Fresh flour tortilla, cooked to perfection with fajita, refried beans, cheese, and a little bit of the guacamole.

If you ever go down to the valley, that's what you're gonna get, but now you can get it in Austin, Texas. And tell me when you're on a diet without telling me that. How about that? We ordered some calabacita. That's right. For you veggie heads out there, it's grilled squash with cilantro, onion, and cebolla, and topped with salsa macha on a corn tortilla.

Beautiful. Alright, let's eat. Okay, we are inside the Q2 stadium. Check it out. We got the media badges. We got ground floor axes walking around. You know, all the Austin FC fans are getting ready for a good match against a big rival, right? Houston Dynamo. I see. I remember that. Uh, you know, and then I ran into, like, my old DJ friend, Orion, from Peligrosa.

He got the vibes going. Ran into another podcaster from the Moon Tower podcast. And you see the fans walking around. Everybody's excited. Everybody has that Austin FC. And for me, I'm in search. Tacos. So we're going to walk around, check it out. Yes, you can get pluckers and all kinds of other things, but for us, it is about the tacos.

So one taco is all I need because we're in search for one taco. So what'd you guys get in the taco line? Because the tacos are really good from here. Oh, they are? They're delicious. Oh, okay. You have a lot of options. You have a lot of options, yeah. You can't go wrong with one taco. That's right. Yeah. Is that all you need?

That's all. Just one taco. I might get three though. Okay. We're getting two. Okay, okay. And the nachos. And the nachos. Why are you in the taco line? It seems like that's a long line. Why? I'm here to get a margarita. Oh, you're here for the margarita. Yes, sir. All right, all right. Well, there you go. Hey, it's close enough.

It's a good partnership. Yes, sir. He's here for the margarita. Okay, we were just at One Taco Taqueria at In Section 135. The tortillas look fresh. The piñas are chunky. He got the lime, quarter limes, and man, that al pastor looks super bright. And so I'm just gonna squeeze in that lime. And you have cebolla, cilantro, piña.

Uh, the salsa con todo. I think that's a theme for this, this podcast episode. Hahaha. Alright, here we go. I love the big chunks. of pina because it's not blended in. You can actually taste it and you're going to feel the crunch. Mmm. Yeah, that pork, definitely super marinated and obviously super bright. Even though, you know, they're not doing it on the trompa, but they're doing it, you know, on the griddle.

It still has that flavor with a little bit of that aceite. It gives it that greasy flavor. And the tortillas holding really well. Yeah, man, if you're going to a hamburger stand or a hot dog stand here at afternoon street, you're doing it wrong. Our next guest is Tony Avila, who co founded One Taco Taqueria.

With a dedication to quality ingredients and traditional recipes learned from their childhoods, Tony and his co founder, Axel Beverido, transformed a food truck into a beloved taco destination. To We're back in the studio in the Taqueria Sin Nombre, but these taqueros do have a nombre. They're from Juan Taco.

We have Tony Avila and Axel Beverido. I got it right. I got it right. Well, welcome to the show. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you for having us. Yeah. Yeah. Gracias. Gracias, Mandola. Es un placer. It's a pleasure to be here. Yeah. No, great to have you all here. Let's start with you, Tony. Um, uh, tell us about the early beginnings of of one taco.

I know you have multiple locations. Now you're inside the Austin FC stadium, but where, where did this partnership begin? Well, I moved to Austin about 17 17 years ago. And one taco was basically born out of the necessity of us being able to get good Mexican food. In places that we, we moved around. I've worked in downtown since I've been here.

And, um, it was hard. It was hard to get your, your good tacos. Cause you always, always had to go to the, the the back of houses. And we know it was good food there, but it was like, why isn't there anything? Uh, mainstream, right? And that's, that's how one taco became a thing. Axel was thinking about opening a restaurant in Mexico.

Um, and he moved to Austin and then we, it's like, Hey, you want, you're interested in this? It's like, yeah, I can't find anything. It's, it's really hard to find stuff. Uh, and then when we saw how much, how much putting a restaurant together costs, we're like, why don't we do a food truck first? So he had. 10, 000 in savings and I put in seven, 7, 500 in a, in a credit card.

Wow. We bought a food truck. We started thinking about the name. Uh, I was like, well, I'll cook and you'll be cashier and then we'll flip. So that, that's how it started. Yeah. Yeah. Axel, what about you? Like, was this something that you were always wanting to do? I mean, I always think it's every Mexicano's dream to open up their own paqueria.

I think, I think that success we have, if you want to call it success, is because we had a dream. That's basically the word. We had a dream and we still have it, right? Um, I'm from Cordoba, Veracruz. I went to college in Monterey and then I had a friend that had taquerias in Monterey and he, he was growing and his business was good.

I like the flavor. I like everything he was doing and I said, okay, I'm gonna do it someday. And then I moved to Austin. My wife's from Laredo, same as him. And I was like, I need to do it. So I talked to him, he's my neighbor, my friend, my compadre, my everything. So we said, okay. After a couple, a couple of chelas, we're business partners.

A lot of chelas. Yes. So we said, let's, let's do it. And, uh, that's how it started. That's, that's cool. That's cool. And so, you know, like Austin has so many, you know, places to get, you know, tacos now, uh, how do you stand out, you know, from all the, the latest and the greatest of, of. the taco scene here in Austin.

Well, for us, standing out is, is, is important. And I think it's part of the experience that you get when you walk into the taquerias or when you interact with the taqueros or the cashiers, right? For us, it's always been about that. It's about replicating what we grew up with. I grew up in Laredo, but lived in Nuevo Laredo, Mexico for 18 years of my life.

So we kind of had an idea of what we wanted. It was all going to be part of the experience. Now being first time restaurant operators, we're like, we always had those questions. We're like, why are these guys successful? And why are these guys are not? Uh, and that's, I think it took, it took a bit before we, like after we started to understand the identity of the company and the brand.

And by doing that, I think the brand starts to form different layers and it gets its own identity and that's how people recognize it. But it's part of the branding. It's part of the colors. It's part of the, the smells and the music that you experience when you go in. So for us, it's like everything we, we, we spent a lot of time sitting down.

I was like, okay, how can we replicate this? And what can we do? So it's an ongoing chase for us to find that perfect balance of enriching and experience that will, that will help us stand out from other people. Yeah. Yeah. Nice. Nice. And so how did you get that opportunity to come into the stadium? Well, we were excited about the team coming to Austin.

Um, in the beginning, somebody, there was, there was rumblings about a food truck park outside the stadium. Okay. They told us, it's like, okay, well, we want to be a part of that. We never thought in a million years to be inside the stadium. That wasn't what we were aiming for, but we started trying to contact people.

And then at one point they're like, we're not going to do the food truck thing. The fire department won't allow it, but there's opportunity for mobile stands inside. Uh, so we were like, okay, we'll work for it. Right. So it included a presentation in front of people from the operator that leave you, the food operator, the concession stand operator at the stadium.

And I think we did pretty well in that, in that presentation. Number one, I think it was like five people and three of them knew one talk already. Yeah. Uh, so that helped. And then the other one is like, we knew exactly what they wanted to replicate. I've been to soccer stadiums in Monterrey numerous times.

He has been, we've, we've been lucky enough to be at stadiums in Europe and, and we know what they wanted to do. Yeah. And, and, and it was pretty easy for us to pitch. We're going to be there. We're your target market. Do you want to do business with Big conglomerates or do you want to do business with us?

Like we can help because we've been there, right? Yeah, and I think that sold him I think it sounds kind of Bad to say of it. I think the honesty we came in with yeah We we want to be a part of this very honest about it. And I think that that communicated well No, no, no, definitely and uh Since we've been in Mexico City, Monterey, Veracruz, all over the place, uh, going to stadiums.

Yeah. We know how the people make lines in taquerias outside or inside the stadium. Yeah, right. So we said, we want to be that taqueria Inside. We want to be the line with the smells, the onions, the pastor and everything. Yeah, yeah. So, it happened. Love it. And so how do you manage the, the high volume of people wanting to get tacos, but without, you know, without being a traditional concession stand?

Sure. Well, first, uh, the first two or three games that weren't that good.

But, uh, that's something we said, okay, so we rather have a great experience that sells. That was the first thing. And then we talked to them and we said, we want to serve as you go. Not having everything ready and they said, okay, that's fine with us. Let's try it. So after the third or fourth game, people were loving it and we're making tacos fast and good enough to offer that to people.

I think there's a balance. And I mentioned this before where like you would wait on a line, but you wouldn't wait that long. Yeah. And I think we were lucky enough to be like, okay. This is the size. This is the process. We can't over complicate the process because it doesn't work. Right. But they were, we were very persistent about that because I remember being in those lines in Monterey and being like, okay, I want the tacos and I already know what I want to order, but it's like, I don't have a lot of time because I got to go back to my seat.

Yeah. Right. Right. And that's something that we. Weren't familiar with, but like Axel said, after the third, fourth game, we were able to say, okay, this is working. We haven't had any complaints. It just happened to work in a good way that it didn't compromise the quality of, of what you can have at our stores versus what you can have at the stadium.

Yeah. You know, you walk around and yeah, they have the burger places, but because of the smells, because of the sasan that you know, that you guys use and, and the steam and then the, the blanca, the all the, all the, all the noises. I wanted to have the little grandma with. Cumbia is, but they didn't let us, I was like, no, no music here.

There's a music here. I was like, we need that. But yeah, right, right, right. But you know, like a good taquero is like a duck in the water, bro. Yeah. You know, like you got to make it together. He's like multiple. That goes at a time and you guys definitely, yeah, yeah. So what about the financial impact on your business scaling up to, you know, I mean, we were talking to the chef and he's like, Oh, well, I gotta get ready to feed 20, 000 people, you know?

So everything we've learned is, is like along the way, it's like. It was a funny story that when first day we opened our food truck, it's like, we didn't know how to operate the coffee machine. And we're like, Oh crap, there's a customer that wants coffee. We don't know how to turn this thing on. It's like, we've already quit my job.

So I don't want to say we play it by ear, but we were, we're like, we, we felt confident about. About the resources we have at the stores and we had enough people to tackle it. And a lot of our team, like a lot of people, we have a really talented team and our people, uh, uh, people in our team that, that know the business that happened in the business for a while.

And we always find them as resources, but what do you think? And we, and I know that we all came together with a plan and, and, and I mean, volume. It, again, it's like finding that perfect balance is like, Oh, I don't know. We don't, we have to be careful about that. It doesn't stay there for two hours, but we've been able to navigate and also, uh, get ready for attack those things.

So one of the goals, um, to be in the Austin FC stadium was the exposure. Right. So when I met people in the street and asked me like, Hey, what do you do for living? I was like, I work for one taco. I was like, I don't know, what is that? What is one taco? Right? So we said, okay, let's go into the Austin FC and see if this changes.

And after three years, I can tell you that people are already noticing this. I think we like to, we always talked about that. And we always had a question. It was like, it always felt like we relate to the party, right? When we're like, okay, when we start, it's like, what are the people that do it? UT, what do they do?

Right. Well, what are the people that are in the arenas? What, what are the people from ACL? What are the people with South by Southwest? And, and, and we're like, we, we were persisting enough. It was like, we want to be the first at one party. And we eventually, right. And Austin FC is that party for us. Oh, that's cool.

Yeah, that's great. So, you know, one of the things that we're examining is the impact of. Austin FC and what that does to a local business like yours. What would you say to, you know, people that are looking to start their own or expand their business? What has this opportunity done for your organization?

First of all, the brand recognition, like Axel mentioned, and the brand, uh, um, being, being, being relatable, right? You see one taco and you, you identify, you associate. Brand association is the word that I was trying to look for. Um, it, it, it has proven to be, uh, great for us. And in this case, we were lucky that Austin FC has impacted in that way because we have a pretty similar customer base.

Uh, but for people that are trying to start, I think the number one thing is, is know who you're, who you're selling to know who your target market is, because it's, then you'll be able to know exactly what they're looking for and give it to them. We identify as, as, uh, Latinos, right. And, and I think. People out there should know that we are part of the group.

We're proud of who we are. And, and we're trying to show that in everything we do, uh, every day in all of our stores, we're trying to bring those things and it's not always as authentic as we would want, but I think there's an element of knowing, having that empathy of knowing who your customer is as well.

And be like, I can't be too aggressive. And I, like, I need to know what exactly what you're looking for. And I'm going to introduce you to the things that came up with authenticity. Right. Yeah. We're really proud of, of having that platform of doing that, of bringing different taco styles from Mexico. And, uh, we're going to continue to do that.

One of our goals is to have a lot of Tucker is where you wouldn't think that we'd do one. So that's, that's the goal. Well, that's. I would say goal. Well, Tony and Axel, thank you so much for being on the show. We really appreciate you and we'll see you out there in the field. Awesome. Thank you guys. Our following guest is chef.

Support for tacos of Texas comes from H E B whose meatienda salsas, marinated meats, tortillas, quesos, and more are inspired by the authentic flavors of Mexico. H E B. Here, everything's better. Sam Boisjoly, the culinary mastermind behind the food scene at Q2 Stadium, home of Austin FC. From traditional stadium snacks to eclectic flavors representing Austin's neighborhoods, he ensures that every visitor gets a taste of the city's vibrant food scene while enjoying the match.

And we're back at the Taqueria Sin Nombre. You know, we just had some tacos for one taco. But right now in front of me, I have chef Sam, who is the senior executive chef at Austin FC. Welcome to the podcast. Thanks. I'm glad to be here. Awesome. Well, tell me a little bit about, you know, your role at Austin FC.

Absolutely. So, um, uh, Sam Boisjoli, uh, last. Name, I'm glad you didn't have to say it, , so we didn't have to butcher that. Uh, but I'm in charge of the, the food program at, at Austin fc. We provide, uh, food services for all premium suites, clubs, and, uh, concessions. So yeah, a lot, a lot going on. So how many people, like, you know, in an regular season, how many people, uh, do you serve?

Uh, well the stadium holds 20,000 and we've had the 20 plus thousand. We've had the longest sold out streak. So, uh, I mean. Add up the events and that's how many people we feed. So it's, it's, it's, it's wild. Yeah, yeah, yeah. And I appreciate you bringing us some tacos. Our friends at One Taco actually did this.

They're one of our, our, uh, uh, subcontractors and partners at the stadium. And, uh, we just love them so much. Really great guys, Axel and Tony, and they just do a fantastic job of doing authentic, uh, street style tacos. Not only the city of Austin, but at. at Q2 Stadium. Yeah, we were there and man, they had the line.

Yeah. And it was great. And they're right there, you know, cooking everything, the steams coming out. Yeah. So people are like, you know what, that is the line I want to get into. Well, the thing is when you, when you eat like in, in, in Latin America, Mexico, uh, different countries, I mean, all the food vendors are completely surrounding the stadiums, usually the, the football soccer stadiums.

And that's where everyone goes, wherever the biggest line is, that's where you want to get That's the guy that has it, right? That's the pro tip right there. So, you know, there's, as you walk through the stadium, they have like the suites, but you also have like your vendor and your partners. How, how do you make those decisions on what food vendors you partner with here in Austin?

Well, we really listen to the fans. I mean, a lot of it is, is, you know, people coming to us and saying, Hey, we have this great product. We'd like to try it. There's been some people that have come to us that are already established, some people that are up and coming. And for us, it's just being representative of different cultures.

Uh, that's what the beautiful melting pot that is the city of Austin. Right. I mean, you know, we, we have some of the best Asian food, some of the best tacos, some of the best Argentinian food, you know, we, we really focus on trying to make it inclusive so that everyone feels that they have some representation, um, at the stadium.

That's really important to us. And you have a connection to South America, right? Yes. Yeah. Yeah. I was born in Santiago, Chile, went to culinary school in Mexico, um, and lived there, lived there for many years and now on the other side of the border. So let's talk about that. Why is it important to have. This kind of menu or this partnership with Taquerias, uh, for, uh, CNFC.

Well, I mean, it's representative of our community. I mean, when you think about some of the best moments that you have with friends and family, uh, being, you know, uh, from Latin background myself and spending a lot of time in Mexico, it's just a really good tacos. Or at midnight after a couple, you know, nice tequilas.

Yeah. You know, you go to the late night Taqueria and it's just, to me, it's the quintessential, uh, Just heartfelt, homey food. I mean, to me, it's just the comfort food. Yeah. Perfect comfort food. Nice, nice. And, you know, whether it's a taco vendor or, you know, an Asian vendor or what have you, the different styles of food, like, how do you make those decisions of, like, you know, how do you manage, like, being in a, you know, a large arena when you think about, you know, when, maybe, like, when you think about baseball and, or maybe going to, you know, American football game.

You know, you know, you get this table. So how do you make those decisions? Well, I mean, I'll be honest with you. A lot of our, uh, our fan choices are also the family, um, selections. They want a really good hot dog. They want to get pretzel, but you know, we're in Austin. So our pretzels are easy tiger pretzels.

So, you know what I'm saying? Yeah, yeah. So we're just really representative of our community. If you walk around. It's the South Alley of, of, of Q2 Stadium. I mean, it just feels like you're walking in South Austin or whatever, you know, it just feels like Austin and it, you know, we're very thoughtful about that because we want, you know, Austin's about small businesses, community, you know, we have a lot of minority owned businesses as well that are there and it's just, it.

It screams Austin, right? And then you add the emotion of the fans and the supporters and everything. I say it all the time, like, it's getting old, I feel, but if I had a friend that had three hours to and he was layover in Austin and I wanted him to see the city of Austin and the food and the culture, the passion.

Go to Q2 Stadium. Come hungry. Yeah. You know, uh, enjoy a match and, and love it, love it. And I did get a kind of a little bit of a preview on that. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, it's really good. Um, yeah, well, you know, thanks so much for being on the show. I appreciate you. Thank you guys so much for having us. We'll see you at the next match.

Okay, we'll see.

Damn. Every time you come to an Austin FC venue, you run into somebody you know. Look at here, it's Celsal. Awesome. What's up, Mando? Good to see you. Good to see you, brother. Alright, alright. So, uh, you came right here after work. You're all suited up. Look at you. All business. But you're here for the math. Yeah, no matter what.

In a jersey or in a blazer, it doesn't matter. We're here. Alright, alright. So, so, like, why are you such a diehard fan and where do you eat? We're here because, you know, the team's building a religion. You think about European teams, uh, they're 100 years old. We're, we're fairly new. And so it's great that Austin FC tries to incorporate local eateries.

And so when we come here, we try to eat at Taco Flats. Uh, always yummy. Uh, veggie options, good queso, good guacamole, um, good birria tacos. Nice, nice. Uh, when, when we're done with a match, if we're still hungry, uh, the pro tip hack is you go to the gas station. The Sonico, right? Yeah, the Sonico. Yeah. You got a row of food trucks.

Nice. All at your disposal. Good people, good food. Pay them a visit. Yeah, and so what would you say to somebody that's like, hey, You know, come, come to the match. Where do we eat out there and also in here? Yeah, yeah. Out there, you got a lot of good breweries that have been part of the culture, uh, leading up to the team's creation, right?

All the hype was going on when Austin FC was, you know, being created. And so a couple of the breweries all around this district, uh, have food trucks outside of the breweries. And so I'd say pay a visit to them. A lot of good breweries, good beer, good food. The gas station, come here, one taco, taco flats. Uh, you got a lot of the Austin staples too.

You got pluckers if you want some wings. Yeah, yeah, yeah, that's cool. But in terms of some tacos, yeah. Yeah, you can't go wrong, right? Taco flats, can't go wrong. Not bad, not bad for stadium food, right? Not bad for stadium food at all. You go to other stadiums across all the country for major league soccer and it's not the same.

It's not the same. It's not the same. Because you're in Texas, baby. Yeah, that's right. That's right. That's right. Hey, what's up? My name is Celso Baez. Diehard Austin FC fan, Listos Verde. Favorite taco here at the stadium. Either a birria taco or a good veggie taco, which is hard to come by when you find a good one.

It beats some of the, the protein filled ones. So veggie tacos don't, don't sleep on them. Okay. So after the Austin FC game, we came, we walked down to the Sunoco over here on Breaker and Aguilar. And I tell you, there's a whole parking lot. Where people can pay to park and not put gas in the gas station.

And they got about 9 taquerias. 9 different food stations. But you also have like little hot dog stands. You have a lady selling some, some elote and chicharron. So you got the whole, the whole experience here. And so I went to Taqueria Los Regios. And I got myself a taco tlaquepaque. Which is a barbacoa and a crispy chicharron.

And so that's how I'm gonna end this night. Right. And so I think, uh, you know, thinking about the impact of Austin FC being in this area where, you know, it was mostly industrial, a lot of tech, you got the domain in the area, but because of the stadium and because of the futboleros and the fans, you know, the raza comes out, which is awesome.

So that way you can, you know, get your taco on, whether it's outside the stadium, the um, or inside. And I think the impact of what Austin FC has done, you know, in this area, not only for Austin, but in this area for the small businesses. And that my friends is a goal.

This has been the Tacos of Texas podcast developed and produced by Identity Productions. If you enjoyed today's episode, So in our craving more taco content, go to our website at www. identity. productions or follow us on Instagram, TikTok, Facebook, and YouTube at Identity Productions and United Tacos of America.

If you like the podcast, don't forget to leave a five star review. Every review helps us keep the podcast. This is your host, Mando el Taco Journalist, Rayo. Vamos a los tacos! On the next Proximo Tacos of Texas, Vaqueros, Longhorns, and Breakfast Tacos. Exploring the origins of the cowboy, vaquero culture, and our favorite breakfast items.

Anna Tortilla. The Tacos of Texas Podcast is presented by Identity Productions in partnership with KOT and KOTX studios. Our host and producer is Mando Rao. Our audio is mixed by Nicholas Weden. Our story producer is me, Louisa Vana, and our creative producer is Dennis Burnett. Music was created by Pale Rosa in Austin, Texas, and King Benny Productions located in the Quinto Barrio of Houston.
