Speaker: [00:00:00] Hello, everyone, and welcome to another episode of On Location. I'm Jared Cowan. Thanks so much for tuning in here today. We are in the city of San Fernando, which is an incorporated part of LA County in the Northeast San Fernando Valley. And it's funny because when I think about it, I feel like we've done a lot of episodes in the Valley.
I mean, I live in the Valley, so it's. It's convenient to do them close by I'm not gonna lie, but, you know, the valley, I think, has been immortalized in, in so many special and spectacular ways, and it's kind of a no brainer to want to cover a lot of places out here. So we're back in [00:01:00] San Fernando, and The last time we were up here was for our 2017 episode.
We recorded at Castles Music, the guitar shop from Wayne's World, which is just a few minutes away from here. And in that episode, we were joined by the business owner. And later in this episode, we're going to be joined by the owner of the location we're visiting today. Majors Coin Laundry. It's one of the central locations from the best picture winning film.
Everything, everywhere, all at once. This is the home and business of the Wang family. And what I love about this location is that beyond all the rocks and raccoons and the cookies and the Kung Fu is that for the Wang family, this is the center of the family unit. And ultimately I feel like that's what this movie is about.
Even through the whole multiverse thing. This movie, I feel like for me anyway, is. It's about the love for the people in our lives that have been chosen for us and, or the people that we've chosen to be in our lives. And though the film has a number of great locations, [00:02:00] I feel like this is the one that feels most accessible.
It's the most grounded, the most relatable. And as a fan of the film to be able to sit here where the team of newly anointed Academy award winners, and so many other talented folks came together to make this movie, a best picture that I feel. is going to stand the test of time, I think that's really significant.
So I'd like to introduce my guest today. She's worked in locations for what? Almost 20 years, almost 
Speaker 2: 20 years. 
Speaker: Yeah. She's worked on a ton of TV, like Speechless United States of Tower. Right. And then I think like over. What, 40 episodes of true blood or something like that. I mean she was the location manager on everything, everywhere, all at once.
I am happy to welcome to the show. Kelly Stewart. Kelly, thank you for joining me here today at major's coin laundry. Yeah, I'm so happy. I just rewatched the film last night. It's so great to be here. I don't know. It's just like, I feel like a connection to the characters and I'm walking through all the washing machines and stuff.
It's kind of [00:03:00] wild. The first thing I actually want to ask you though is like, currently while we're recording this episode, there's this writer strike going on, and you see how, you know, people publicize how it affects, you know, you see the actors out there, you know, supporting and walking around with people that are on the picket lines, and there's, you know, directors saying things too, and I'm curious like, how does it affect location professionals?
Speaker 2: Well, it's been really interesting in the sense that, I would say probably at the beginning of the year, the studios knew that there was going to be a writer's strike and probably wanted one. So production completely slowed down and I know people who haven't worked since last year. My husband, who's a graphic designer in television, his show ended in like, I want to say, Beginning of March or mid March and he has, he normally gets a show or gets a project right away after that and he has not worked.
I did a pilot that went, you know, was in March and everybody, you know, was like, oh my god, wow, you're working. Now the pilot [00:04:00] ended and that's it. There's nothing. There's no jobs. We have, in locations, we're in a union, we're part of the Teamsters union. And we have a list of availability and you put your name on the list.
If you're looking for a job and there's something like, there's close to almost a hundred just location managers, probably the same amount of assistants and keys. So it's hands down of the 20 years I've been doing this, the most like people that have been available and not working. So it's, it's really bad right now.
Like a lot of people are, you know, freaking out that it's going to go for, and I, you know, I agree. I think it's going to go a couple of months easily. And so unless you're on. Some TV shows were going, but most of them shut down. I mean, TV, you pretty much can't do without writers. And some features I think are probably still filming just because they have the script so they can keep going.
I think it's foolish to do any filming without a writer, but that's just my opinion. So pretty much slowly, but surely everything will, will shut down. 
Speaker: Do you [00:05:00] have any favorite locations that have been used in other, whether it's TV or, or movies? 
Speaker 2: I'm a big fan of finding those really rare, quirky, kind of like crappy locations.
Like, I think anybody can go and find you the Disney Concert Hall and find you like a beautiful mansion. And you see a lot of the, you know, like the iconic stuff. But I don't, I just think it's kind of, I think it's kind of boring. Whereas, give me like that dump. And, like, some, like, scary place that you would, like, bury a body.
Like, that, to me, is something that's way cooler to find than some rich, some, where some rich person goes and does something, like, beautiful. I, I, no, that sounds kind of weird. Like, that's, I loved working on True Blood because it was, like, go find a crack den. Or go find like you like a gun store that we turned into a steak store or like, you know, stuff like that, which is super cool to me.
Like this laundromat is so cool because [00:06:00] it's, you know, it's, it's, you're not going to walk in. And I mean, I guess there are some laundromats that have become hipsters places. But that's more like more like in the center of the city, Los Angeles has that. And we obviously did not want a hipster, like there was actually a laundromat that was like.
Probably two blocks from where one of the directors lived at the time because I met they had an office behind their house and when I met with them, I went over there and there was a laundromat that was like two blocks from there and the old pictures. I was like, Oh my God, I gotta go see this laundromat.
And I went there and they had like Just remodeled. And so they turned it like super hipstery and I was like, damn it. Do you know how much they would have loved me if I was like, found you a laundry where you could walk to. 
Speaker: Right. 
Speaker 2: But that didn't work. That didn't work out. 
Speaker: I wanted to ask you about True Blood.
Like you're working on so many episodes. What is the challenge of trying to find all these locations in Los Angeles for a show that's set in the deep South or other places through [00:07:00] flashbacks that they would have? 
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was really challenging. Cause it was like, we had to avoid mountains. We had to avoid palm trees.
So it was definitely challenging finding it, but it was cool because since it was sort of like the backwards kind of look, we could go. Deep into like, Calabasas, or just like areas that, like Canyon Country, where it wasn't like, we very, we didn't really ever go into the city very much, just because it wasn't, you know, it was like the bayou kind of thing, not, it wasn't, you know, a major, it wasn't, the setting was not a city.
So I think the only times we ever went anywhere close to LA was like, we went to some bars, or like, we went to Alex's bar in Long Beach all the time for the, for Fantasia. 
Speaker 3: Yeah. 
Speaker 2: So like places like that, or there was a the Belfier house was in was in Hancock Park. So it was, it was definitely more of a, you could go to all different kinds of places.
We didn't have to be, I mean, nobody likes going to Long Beach. I can tell you [00:08:00] that. It's such a weird thing. But. It's, but we, we very rarely, like, I hate filming downtown Los Angeles, but so it was cool to be able to find again, like, like a, I remember once I had to find this, like, kind of where these, like, kind of like a crack den where these, like, criminals were hanging out.
But it was, you, we also had to then find a new place because we found black mold there. So that's the, that's the rub with finding a shitty dump location is that it ends up being Unsafe like the Linda. I don't know if you ever went to Linda Vista Hospital before. Well, yeah, it's not there anymore, but it was that place was rough.
I mean, we shot there. We turned it into a former former mental institution. It was so cool. It looked so great, but it was such a dump though. There are actresses walking to set ones and a window fell out from like the fifth floor and they were like, Hey, what are you going to Kelly? How, [00:09:00] you know, what are you going to do about the fact that this place isn't safe?
And I was like, it's an abandoned hospital. 
Speaker: Don't come shoot here. I mean, it 
Speaker 2: was just a lot of like, we always had issues with. Some unsafes. Like you have that issue when you go and you find these like abandoned, whatever, 
Speaker: you have 
Speaker 2: issues. It was challenging sometimes with, I went to a, you know, you go to churches a lot for parking and I got, I was told by a church that they didn't want us because we were a show about vampires.
And it was like, you know they're not real, 
Speaker: right? I mean, I've heard a lot of stuff. I mean, you always hear, you know, if it's a sensitive issue where there's gun, You know, gun play or something. Oh, people don't 
Speaker 2: care about guns, but they have a huge problem with sex. 
Speaker: With sex, yeah. Sex is usually 
Speaker 2: when I've, I've been denied with stuff because I'm like, so you would let me, like, going to church, I'm like, you would let me hang a nun off the banister, but you won't let us have a scene where the preacher's, you know, having an affair [00:10:00] in his office.
And they're like, no. So it's very you, you definitely like, I mean, I got, I've been thrown out of churches where they were like, we don't want your kind here. And I'm like, my money. I mean, that's what I'm offering you is money, but I mean, okay. So it, yeah, it is uncomfortable at times when you're like, so we want to have this scene where they're like having an orgy and they're all going to be naked and we want to shoot it in your business.
And they're like. So it's, I definitely, it, you know, same with everything, everywhere. There were some times where like, so they're going to be fighting with dildos and you have to, you know, be up front and tell people that. And so sometimes it's nice when I go and work on my nice little ABC sitcoms and I don't have to talk to anybody about nudity or sex.
And it's like, Oh, it's just talking, walking and talking. That's it. You're like, that's so every once in a while, my like really [00:11:00] simple, easy, fun comedies are a break from the stress of like. Fuck, how am I supposed to talk to this guy about, you know, this really uncomfortable sex scene that we want to shoot?
Obviously we don't shoot real sex scenes. 
Speaker: Pulled in here today. Have you been here since you made the movie? No. And you're like driven by here. I mean, I don't know if you'd have a reason to, but No, but trust 
Speaker 2: me, if I ever read, you know, in a script, Laundromat, this would be my first place to call. Like, absolutely.
I would come back here in a heartbeat. If I, if I needed a Laundromat again for filming, I would totally come back here. Do you think people 
Speaker: would recognize it? Like, do you think now it's, it's part of this, like, pop culture, like, phenomenon, I would say, you know? I mean Is that ever problematic, do you think, for whether it's directors or production designers?
Like, oh, this is the laundromat from everything, everywhere, all at once. 
Speaker 2: Some directors would be like, no, I don't, I don't want to shoot that. Find me something new. 
Speaker: Yeah. 
Speaker 2: And then, you know, but if it's TV, sometimes you You can do it. You do it quick enough that you don't, you won't recognize it. You [00:12:00] shoot it differently.
I mean, one, I'm sure you notice when you walk up, this is only a one story building. It's not two story, which is what they faked in the movie. And they had wanted me to find a two story, but it's pretty rare to find. you know, anything that's two story. A lot of laundromats are in strip malls, which are super boring.
And then you just don't have as much control. It just doesn't look as cool, a strip mall. So they did want to stand alone, but I mean, why would a laundromat have a second story? Now this was supposed to be kind of anywhere USA. So anywhere I think else in California might have that, but in California it's pretty rare.
So luckily when I showed them this place, I was like, I know it doesn't have a second story, can you? And they're like, well, fake it. There's a, you know, when they, when you're watching the movie, they go, you know, they go through a door to go up the stairs to go into the apartment. And it's this tiny, tiny closet that literally they, they did it.
So you open the door and you turn left. And that's literally like [00:13:00] a wall, practically. So it was, it, it, they did a really good job, I think, editing it together. Like, and then they. There's a scene on the stairs and I actually found a business that was a couple blocks away from here that I, you know, they were like, they're like a, the business, they do some kind of like, they make airplane parts or something.
And so we shot the stairs 
Speaker: there. You know, when you're driving around looking for a laundromat, a laundromat's a laundromat, but how do you find a set of stairs? 
Speaker 2: Well, you go to, you drive around businesses that are two stories, and you knock on the door and you, and you just say, Can I look at your stairs?
And they laugh at you. 
Speaker 3: Yeah. 
Speaker 2: And they're like, yeah. guess. So yeah, I mean, that's and we knew that it would be easier if we did it because it wasn't a very long scene. I don't even think it was a full day. I think it was like a half a day shoot. So obviously we needed to be able to move from somewhere else without having to move base camp because that's really, you know, that takes a long time and having to move the working trucks already takes a long time.
So we wanted it really close to [00:14:00] here. So basically, I just started circling the blocks. And if you go like a two blocks over, I mean, this is mostly industrial. This is mostly like all businesses and stuff. So a little bit that way, I just drove down the street and knocked on doors. I didn't actually, I don't feel like I had to go to very many.
I found that one and I thought they actually had like three sets of stairs. So I was like, great choices in one place. 
Speaker: Pulling up in here today. Are there any like. memories that immediately just come back and hit you not having been here for three plus years? 
Speaker 2: Well honestly like well, what's scary is what what where my memory goes to is we shot this right before the whole country shut down for the pandemic.
So I come here and I remember like I had one assistant who was out sick and the other assistant I remember sitting next to him were like at, you know, catering and he's like, yeah, I'm not feeling well. And I was like, Oh, like I've, those things are coming back and we started the elbow bumping here.
Remember elbow bumping everybody in the parking lot. So I, that, those are some of the memories that are coming back about [00:15:00] how that really hit right when. You know, otherwise, I just remember like, I remember coming here for the first time, because you know, I, I probably looked at over a hundred laundromats to find this particular one, and there were some, I mean, because there's obviously, there's literally like a laundromat on every corner.
I mean, there really are, so I went to so many because, you know, it has to be big enough. Standalone would be preferable. Second story, which obviously didn't work out. But like, it just, they do a lot of stuff in here. I mean, we were here for an entire week filming. And I was looking for, you know, really was trying to find that perfect location.
So I went, I mean, there was some that I just, I drove by. I didn't even, like, pull into the parking lot. Some I pulled into the parking lot and then left. Some I walked in and walked out. And then some I would walk in and I could never find anybody who worked there. Like, it's really, It's a weird thing.
People don't work at laundromats. Kenny is here, the owner, which was crazy when I walked in. And when I walked in, when [00:16:00] I walked into this place, I was like, this is it. This is the one. I just knew it. 
Speaker: What was it about it? Was it the space? Was it, I mean, it's standalone building, you said. It's the 
Speaker 2: space, it's the feeling, like this is, you know, as you say when you're watching the movie, you see them, it's like, you know, they'd spent like 30 years or something here.
And so obviously, you know, this was in the 1990s, apparently, when they first came, so it has to be dated. Can't be something that's been recently remodeled. We didn't have that much money, so I couldn't come in and find something that the art department was gonna have to, like, spend a lot of money.
Changing it to make it look, you know, dated. And this place, it, you know, it's got that, it's got wood paneling, so. That is rare, but that also gives so much character to a place instead of either white walls or, some laundromats have like, I don't know what this weird rusty red is popular in laundromats.
It just, and it's big, but it's got like depth to it, so some laundromats, a lot of laundromats are really like thin. So [00:17:00] there's, so yeah, you get up on one side, but then it feels kind of cramped on the other. So this one's like a square. I know it sounds, it doesn't sound that interesting the way I'm describing it, but it just has it gives you a lot of space to move around on all sides.
So there isn't like a stop ever, which is really cool, like as you can see when you go in, you can go up and down all the aisles without having to turn around and go back. 
Speaker: Yeah, I, I, And what I like what you said about it kind of feeling dated. I feel like the whole movie has this kind of timeless quality to it, which is why I think the movie.
will stand the test of time. I feel like, 
Speaker 2: you know, it wasn't necessarily supposed to be like, it wasn't supposed to be LA. It was, it was just supposed to be anywhere USA, which is, you know, something we always say. And in our world, as far as what am I looking for? Where is it supposed to be? It's anywhere USA.
Because California does have a very specific look. So a lot of the times I'm fighting against that [00:18:00] California look like I think maybe once or twice in my career, I've worked at a I've worked on a project that was set in LA and I was like, Oh my God, this is so exciting. I can see palm trees. I can do California.
So usually it's anywhere USA. I feel like you can give the viewer a lot more to decide on their own. Like when you specifically set it somewhere. Yeah, it's cool for the people who live there because they'd be like, Oh my God, that's, you know. But if you're not actually shooting there. Why? 
Speaker: I think the one point where you do see where it's supposed to be is after the first incident at the IRS building, then we cut to that interior of the bar.
And she's watching the TV and it says, incident at IRS building at Simi Valley. Yeah, it does say Simi Valley. But you know, again, true. I think unless you live here, Simi Valley doesn't mean anything. You know, it doesn't really mes me. It doesn't simi, it doesn't really, it doesn't really register. You know what I mean?
Trues Los Angeles, like, 
Speaker 2: you're right. Actually, now that I think about it, that was, they did turn [00:19:00] it and say Simi Valley, whereas. It was never that in the script or anything. I 
Speaker: feel like you do see some California license plates maybe on the cars. 
Speaker 2: Yeah, they weren't going to change, they weren't going to change those license plates.
That's a pain in the ass. Whenever they, I mean, they, they probably changed any that were directly seen. But in other projects and stuff, you know, they, if you're, if it's specifically New York, your props guy literally has to go around and put them on all the cars that they see. You know, if you've ever parked in the wrong place, your car gets a new license plate.
So Yeah, you're right. 
Speaker: Well, that's why I'm wondering if it feels like, like, is the la then, is the laundromat supposed to be, like, in Simi Valley? Like, are they, are they in, like, a decent driving distance from the laundromat to the IRS building? Are they having to go? A distance to the IRS building. So anyway, these are just the things I start to think about when I was rewatching it.
Cause the real 
Speaker 2: IRS is downtown. I actually called them too. 
Speaker: Oh, you did? Yeah. 
Speaker 2: I called them one to see, because I was like, what's a real IRS [00:20:00] building look like? Let's go shoot it actually in an IRS building. And nobody really ever called me back. I also tried to, I think I. I feel like I tried to set up where they, I wanted to send the directors to go there just, and the, and the production designer to go for research sake.
I think I tried to do that. And I honestly, I cannot remember, I didn't, if, if they went, they, they went and I didn't go. But I do remember trying to set it up where they could go just to, for research. But I don't think, I don't think they really want you there. Yeah. The actual IRS. 
Speaker: As far as you know, was this movie always going to be shot here?
Or was, did you ever hear about anything they were, about going anywhere else? 
Speaker 2: No, I don't, I never heard anything about going anywhere else. Just because usually by the time they hire me, you know, they have to have money. Sure, right. So they've already decided where it's going to be. Right. I just didn't know like 
Speaker: through the grapevine if it ever, if you had ever It 
Speaker 2: is surprising because, you know, maybe they tried to get finance, maybe they tried to get incentives from another state or something and it didn't [00:21:00] happen because, you know, most features don't film here.
It's, you know, I know you were asking me before why I do so much TV and that's because that's most of the work is TV here. There aren't as many features that are shot in Los Angeles anymore. You know, unless you're trying to get that downtown look, a lot of people shoot because they like the downtown, but, you know, as far as It's, I know it's more expensive to film here, but I mean, you get the best crews, you'll get the, if you want to shoot where you get the best people and the, what the most experience you shoot here, anywhere else, people will go.
They'll be like, you know, you, you don't get as good of a crew as you do in LA. Like I, I worked with a director once, even he was from New York and he was like, you know, coming here and shooting with you guys in LA. He's like, he's like, it's like, you know, I've been. driving a Prius and I come here and I'm in the Cadillac.
So it's, it's nothing against, I mean, I've never shot anywhere else. Obviously they don't usually take location managers out of town, but. [00:22:00] I do feel like, you know, we're the, we have the most experience, we're the experts. So, yeah, we're more expensive, but you get what you pay for. I 
Speaker: mean, how'd you get into locations?
Speaker 2: I totally fell into it. It was, it was really weird. I kind of started working in, like I worked at a talent agency, and then I went and worked for some producers in development. And see, when you work in development, it just feels like you're doing nothing and accomplishing nothing because it takes so long to get anything made that you're just kind of spinning your wheels.
And I really wanted that feeling of like working on something on a project where you like actually start it and finish it. And so, I got laid off working for some producers, and it was right around 9 11, I got laid off, and when I started looking for a new job, I was just like, I threw, I cast a very wide net, and I, and I had met with a producer who was You know, saying like looking for an assistant and she called me and she was like, you know, I had to hire [00:23:00] Somebody's kid so or somebody's, you know, like a nepotism kind of hire and she's like but my location manager is looking for a coordinator Are you interested?
And I was like, yeah, totally. I'm totally interested. And then I hung up with her. I was like, I had to call somebody to be like, what's locations. I mean, I literally had no idea what it was. And so, yeah, I got, I got the job and it was like a crash course in locations and never left. 
Speaker: What is it that you like about it?
I know there's, I'm sure there are plenty of things that are on the more difficult side and things maybe you don't like about it, but what are the things that you like about it that keep you wanting to do it? 
Speaker 2: I like the creative process of it. I feel like when I find that right location, it gives me, it's exciting when you find something that you're like, oh my god, this is the one.
And when they pick it, I feel like I have a good eye in the sense that there's been some locations whenever I've been like, this is the one, they pick it, you know. Or if ever they're like, I don't [00:24:00] know, you know, you show them pictures first, and then you have to take them to see it. And there's been times when I've, you know, You know it's gotten pictures from say somebody else like a service and then you go see it and you're like, oh, this isn't good 
Speaker 3: Yeah 
Speaker 2: But if I've been there too, and then I show other people pictures and they don't want to go see it That's frustrating.
So there's been times when I've forced people to where I'm like, you're gonna go see this I'm putting it on the schedule and we're gonna go see it and they're like, yeah, but I don't know I'm like, no No, no, we're gonna we're gonna we're gonna go see it Cuz you're not, you're not seeing it the way I'm seeing it.
And so then they go and they see it and they love it. So I do like kind of doing that. I mean, it's a little frustrating when you have to be like, get in the, get in the van, get in the van. We're going to see this, get in the van. That part I like and I have had assistants who have been like, oh my god, Kelly, why did you show them this location?
It's like, it's the fucking worst. It's gonna be so hard. It's such a nightmare and I'm like. Because it's perfect for this, the script. It's like perfect and they're like, Ugh, they get so frustrated with me because, but I, [00:25:00] I have that problem where I'm always like, Oh, I got to show them this, that it's perfect.
And then after they love it, then I'm like, Oh shit, what was I? Why did I just made my job 500 times harder? 
Speaker: Does all that creative stuff help balance out all the shitty stuff that you have to do as a location professional. 
Speaker 2: It totally depends. It depends. Like there's times where no, it doesn't, but that, you know, that's like a lot of factors, like.
You know, how great is the crew? Do you like the people? Like, do I like the people that I work with? Like, is the director cool? Or, you know, is he or she an asshole? So, when you work for producers that are dicks or directors that are dicks, no, it's not worth it. It sucks. Like, you know, because there's been times where they're ridiculous, you know?
And so when it's, when they're not like that and when they're appreciative and when people get it and they respect your craft. So like, that's the one thing [00:26:00] about, you know, crew members. We all have our own craft. We all do our own thing. So if we can respect each other and not do something that makes your job harder.
Then yeah, it's great. Because if you like the crew, then I want to do stuff for them, you know, like I want to go push the producer to give me more air conditioning. I was stupid, but like I want more air conditioning or I want a nicer porta potty because the crew's great. It's like they shouldn't have to.
I know it's gonna be like hot where we're at. So can I get a cooling tent? And I have to fight with the producers to get this because I want everybody not to have a shitty day. So That's where, to me, it comes in whether it balances well. 
Speaker: What's just some of the worst crap you've had to deal with on a product?
You don't have to name names or shows. Just like, is there an example of just something just? 
Speaker 2: What's really sad is it always seems to come down to bathrooms. I don't know what it is about some crew members, but they just have this, they just feel like they should be [00:27:00] able to use whatever bathroom they want to use.
So if you're in like a really old building, that's like been abandoned for, you know, even if in a building has been abandoned for like six months, it's like plumbing does not stay functioning. Like, I don't know what it is. But if you don't use it, you lose it. And there's times when it's like, you'll say, don't use these bathrooms, they're out of order.
And you find that crew member is like, pull down your out of order signs. And pull off the caution tape. And they go in, and they use the bathroom, and then it's like, flooding. And you're like, fuck, now I gotta fucking deal with the flooding because some asshole thought he knew better than I did that this bathroom is out of fucking order.
So that's when it, those are, those are the worst. Like the bathroom things are the fucking worst. I mean, other things are like, I don't like, like sometimes when you're filming downtown and it's like at night, it can be kind of, Sketchy and scary. I've had bosses who are like, Go scout what it looks like to, you know, on, [00:28:00] you know, 9th and Main at, when it gets dark.
And you're like, fuck you, you go fucking scout it. Like, no. So there's been times where I've had to go with security to scout something, like, Or, you know, a Teamster is better than security, I think. But those definitely, like, scary situations are 
Speaker: Yep. Whoa. 
Speaker 2: It's party time. Yeah. 
Speaker: There's the tire repair shop across the street.
Speaker 2: I kind of sadly feel like if you ask any other crew member like what's the worst job? A lot of them will say locations is the worst job because they do know, like they do know that we have a lot of shitty stuff that we have to deal with. Let's say. It is a difficult location in the sense that, I don't know, you're shooting on the second floor and there's no elevator.
Which I try really, really, really, really hard not to do that. Because that sucks for the crew to have to carry shit up the stairs. And, you know, or like, there isn't anywhere to park. Like, there's nothing worse when you show up and they're like, we're gonna see 360. And you're like, fuck you. We have trucks.
You have to park trucks. [00:29:00] So you don't want to see trucks. Which means, in my mind, That's great. The director's thinking about what a great shot they're going to get. And all I'm thinking about is where are we going to park the fucking trucks? Because that's going to piss off the crew and that sucks. That sucks to have to park far away.
That means the crew has to push all of their equipment. And we have a lot of equipment. I work on big shows. I don't work on little shows with like, you know, an iPhone. It's like, this is hardcore light, heavy lights, heavy cameras, you know, cable. Seastance, everything is heavy. And if the crew has to park far away, then that's really far for them to go.
And the worst, and what they'll walk up and they'll say is, Who picked this location? This location sucks. And then they'll look at me. And so, if the, if the crew is complaining about the location, they come to me. If the public is p pissed that you're filming at a location, they come to me. So I can spend an entire day getting yelled at by everybody.
by crew members, by neighbors, by business owners. I mean, there's been [00:30:00] days when it's like you spend all day just getting yelled at. It can really grate on the nerves, but the, but the crew members that are cool about it, you know. That's one thing I like about TV, too, is that you work a long time with people, and especially if you go multiple seasons, you get to know everybody, and people know that they don't want to fuck you over.
So, you know, it's like we help each other out. 
Speaker: How did this movie, Everything Everywhere, even wind up, wind in your lap? 
Speaker 2: It was A24. I did a couple projects for them. I did a pilot. I did a, a TV series Moonbase, which has ended up being on Showtime, I think. So I did that with them. I did the pilot, I think.
And I may have done, like, a couple other, like, really little things. So, so I got recommended by by other people. And then I met with the directors because they had shot their first movie out of town. So they also didn't really, they didn't really know any location managers either. 
Speaker: Obviously, you're dealing with production designers who will then, I [00:31:00] know, relay info to the director, but how common is it for the location manager to meet directly with the directors.
Speaker 2: It's really, it's pretty, I think it's common in features. It's, it doesn't happen in TV. In TV, you generally, like the line producer and the UPM hire you, but sometimes you'll meet with a production designer first. That's really more, much more common is that I meet with a production designer in TV because in, you know, directors are a little bit more for hire.
Unless there's an executive producer director who is going to direct a couple of episodes or something, then sometimes you'll meet with that director. But I've met with, on a pilot, I've met with a showrunner before but for, you know, but it's, it is, you know, rare to meet with the director just because my position is not hired by them.
My position is hired by the line producer. 
Speaker: The Daniels, they wanted to meet with you. Did you get the sense, upon meeting them, locations were important to them in this movie? Like, what, what did they stress to you? 
Speaker 2: I think that they understood the constraints that they had [00:32:00] budget wise, which is really cool, because most people say they get it, and they don't.
You know, like, they're like, they want Taj Mahal on, you know, laundromat budget. And you're like, I can't give you the the Taj Mahal. You can shoot at this laundromat. So, but they got it. So they weren't so they were cool about that. I do feel like I mean, I feel like everything was important to them, you know, like, this was really important to them, like, they really, they cared about this story, and it was personal for them, so they really What I liked about them is that it was more like, here are some inspirational pictures of the feeling, so that you would walk into a location and get that feeling, as opposed to them specifically saying, Go to this, you know, I shot at this one house once on Mulholland Drive 20 years ago for this project and see if you can find that house.
And you're like, fuck you, you know, like, can't I just fucking find a cool fucking house for your new project instead of some bullshit house you [00:33:00] shot 20 years ago? Like, there are some people who come up with that kind of shit and you're like, what the fuck? I'll find you a fucking great location. And you do end up having to do that.
It's just that you have to go through the 500 steps to get them away from there. Pre existing like ideas, so they were cool where they weren't throwing out stupid location ideas for me They gave me like I want to say like a bit more like a vision board Whereas or like the lookbook that the the production designer creates so then you get more of So it's like a feeling.
I like that a lot better. 
Speaker: From those images that they shared with you, what kind of feeling came from that? 
Speaker 2: Well like for this location specifically, it was definitely a more of a feeling of like a A family business, because a lot of laundromats you go to feel like corporations probably own them.
Which is also why you can't find anybody who works there. I mean, like, I feel bad for the people in there doing laundry. If your machine breaks, it's like, here's a phone number. [00:34:00] You probably won't reach anybody, because trust me, I tried all those phone numbers. No one answers. And so you, it had to feel more like a family business where you walk in and they actually are there, the owners actually work there, you know, so there's like personal things around, it's not just like, you know, painted ugly color walls with like, you know, a vending machine of like quarters and laundry detergent, and then that's it, and then laundry machines, so it just needed to feel like lived in more, like, that people actually give a shit about this place, that they work here, 
Speaker: When we talked Before, you told me that when you met with the Daniels, you kind of had a personal theory about like what the movie was.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. I did well, because I read the script first and I felt like well because to me you know, the movie is about family and it's about this woman who has spent her whole life kind of like chasing these dreams and in the end, You know process has kind of [00:35:00] ignored her family, which is why like her husband wants to divorce her and her daughter hates her And it's like she has to wake up to realize I was chasing all of these dreams, but my dream is like right in front of me It's my family And so my theory was that it was more like a psychotic break that there really wasn't these multi universes that it was really just her Coming to terms of that.
She needed to stop And pay more attention to her family and, and they just smiled at me and answered, did not answer. It was hilarious. They were just like, oh, that's nice that you thought you know what this movie is about. I was like, okay, so you're not going to tell me. 
Speaker: When you would take them around looking at locations, do they get excited?
Can you see that, like, it's inspiring to them? Or did they keep everything pretty kind of close to the, to the vest? 
Speaker 2: They're, you know, one thing that was really cool about them is that they were willing to look at every single location as if we're shooting here. So if I took them to the location, they would act out [00:36:00] scenes and film each other.
So I think because there were two of them, too, you know, they always sort of were like filming each other like, okay, if we shot here, where would we shoot XYZ scene? And so one of them would kind of sort of act it out or they even had sometimes have us walking around and like Walk from there as if you're coming from this and so they every location they would try to look at it as if We were going to film there, so I feel like that's a really rare thing, because some, some don't always have vision where they can see it until it's ready for them to shoot it, but they were willing to adapt to anywhere that we went but so, in a sense, they got excited about everything, so yeah, I feel like, and then I do feel like the places that were more perfect, they definitely had I could tell, like, there was more excitement for the places that were better, you know, like, this is the one, kind 
Speaker: of thing.
Would you say the laundromat is I don't know. Was it among or was it the hardest location to find? [00:37:00] 
Speaker 2: It was the hardest to find because I, I looked for weeks and I went to probably, I'm not kidding, I probably went to a hundred laundromats. It was definitely the hardest to find. 
Speaker: What's interesting about this place is it's, the main road's over there.
It's not on San Fernando Road. It's on this kind of side road across the street. There's a tire repair place, but then it's just neighborhood right next to it, you know? So, was it really just driving? You know, you're not on the main No, I literally 
Speaker 2: Google. I'll just pick an area and Google laundromats and then I go and drive to it.
So yeah, I would just pick different areas and once I've, you know, scoped all of Los Angeles and was like, fucking there's nothing in Los Angeles, then I would go to other areas and just Google it. And then there were times where, yeah. Once I was somewhere and I specifically went and looked at a very specific laundromat, then I would drive around because there's so many laundromats.
But this place I did Google first and found it and specifically drove here for this. 
Speaker: It would seem like [00:38:00] it's helpful that it's actually not on San Fernando Road. Yes. Like that it is on this kind of side street. 
Speaker 2: Yes, because it's, there was an exterior shot, so, but there are things that you can do, I mean, you could get ITC and we shot it at night, so it got dark at like, although granted, when we shot in December, it was getting dark at like 5pm or something, so you can't do that during rush hour, so it is more, it's definitely worse to find something on a busy road, so yeah, there are times where you're like, it has to be really awesome if you're gonna do it.
Give them something that's on a huge busy road, you know, right? 
Speaker: So they did the set extension with cgi on the top. 
Speaker 2: Yes, 
Speaker: and the actual apartment was on a stage Yeah, they 
Speaker 2: well it was I It was not on a stage. It was actually in the office building in the cafeteria So in the office building that we shot, I mean that was oh you 
Speaker: built the set they in the office building Yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, they built it there. 
Speaker: Oh cool. 
Speaker 2: Yeah, 
Speaker: that's awesome. And how about now that i'm thinking about it How about that other, [00:39:00] there's like a wood paneled office that they're in. 
Speaker 2: That's it, that was in the same office building. 
Speaker: So they did That was actually, I 
Speaker 2: think somebody had built a set in there. And so they left it and it looks like an executive office and we used that.
Speaker: Yeah, cause it doesn't match like the rest of the building. It's got it's own particular look. No, but there were 
Speaker 2: some nicer executive offices in there. Like some of them had escape rooms, escape route. Like it was, I remember that being like really weird. Cause it was a, Former bank and I guess, you know, maybe they're expecting people to be like come in angry.
I don't know. There were some like escape rooms It was interesting But yeah, I know that there was we did a lot I mean, obviously we shot the majority of it there at the office But I do feel like that the laundromat even though we shot the majority of the movie in the office I feel like this was the most important location because this was the lead characters like this was our home so this was an emotional attachment location, whereas the office was not 
Speaker: 100%.
[00:40:00] And I think I mentioned to you before, like the last scene with them out here between her and her daughter, it's just like Incredible, you know, and the fact that that is right, you know, that all took place right here. Yeah, right where my car is parked. Yeah, I mean, it's, it's really great. So you are, you know, you're filming between here, which is in San Fernando.
What's actually interesting about this, when I mapped it out, is literally the other side of the street is L. A. Because here you have the brown and white signs, and across the street are the blue signs. So this is literally the border of San Fernando and Like Sylmar, which is in the city of Los Angeles.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's too bad because San Fernando's way harder to permit than L. A. The 
Speaker: tire repair shop is in L. A. and we're in San Fernando, so you're, you're, you're dealing with this. You're dealing with the city of San Fernando, you're out in Simi Valley, and then you are also in LA. 
Speaker 2: Oh, we were all over the place.
Speaker: So you're dealing with all these different municipalities. So, I don't know, what's some of the differences [00:41:00] between going from like LA to San Fernando to shoot here? 
Speaker 2: Well, since everybody shoots in L. A., they've really got it down to a science. So they really, it's a lot easier to, the process is a lot easier.
But when you come to these smaller cities that don't, like, they don't use Film LA, so they have their own, say, film office, it's a lot harder. Because usually it's somebody who either doesn't want the job, or they're doing it in addition to something else that they're doing. So it's not just, they're not just there for your.
film permit. So it takes, I think it took us two weeks to get this permit, which is like practically impossible. Like you, most of the time anybody would tell me it's a two week permit process. I'd be like, bye. Like I won't even consider it. So like film LA is four days and that like, cause I, a lot, sometimes I'll work on sitcoms and we shoot five days that makes it really hard.
So this was definitely but we have the time that we were at the office for so long. So we had the, you know, time to spend. The extra amount of time to permit it. But [00:42:00] otherwise, I mean, that was really it. It was otherwise really easy to film here. Like they were all really cool. We had, we got to use their car.
We had to use their cops. Cause when we filmed outside, we did have ITC, which we barely need. Cause it's not like there's a lot of cars that come by here, but. It was an emotional, quiet outside scene. So we did hire a couple of cops to hold any traffic that did come. So we had to hire San Fernando cops and they were all really great.
I'm sure we probably had to have a fire safety officer too. I can't remember. Usually they stick us with one for some stupid reason and they're expensive. So but otherwise, no, I thought, I thought San Fernando was, was pretty cool. Like we got that I did permit that other location because the only reason, the only way I could do that other location too is since it was something that kind of, it ended up kind of, coming up a little later that they were like, Hey, go find this.
They had their own parking lot. So because I didn't need to get anything on the street, I was able to permit it a lot quicker. 
Speaker: And so the, [00:43:00] this, the IRS building out there in Simi Valley, what, so what was that building? 
Speaker 2: It was a former Countrywide. So everybody mistakenly says that it was a former Bank of America.
Cause I've read other like, The production designer is interviewed often and they're always like, Oh, they shot in this former Bank of America building. It was not Bank of America. Bank of America was actually across the street. They actually had a parking garage that a lot of people kept trying to park in that we were like, No.
But so Bank of America was across the street. This was former Countrywide. And it had been closed down for a while because Countrywide, if you remember, was one of the Banks that was instrumental in the whole crash of real estate, the real estate market crashing. And so when we went there and everybody was like, Oh fuck, this was a countrywide, like they felt that it was sort of like.
A bad omen that the place had bad vibes because there were people's lives and dreams who were probably ruined in that building. So because there were a lot of people too, who'd come in from China, we did this [00:44:00] blessing. They did sort of like a Chinese blessing on the place to kind of try to get rid of all of that bad energy.
Speaker: Wow. 
Speaker 2: Like we celebrated Chinese new year. Like we did some of those things. 
Speaker: What's I mean, what's interesting about what you said about people's dreams. Like that's a place where. Possibly, likely, many people's dreams just like died in that film. I mean, when you think about her character, too, and like you're saying about, you know, these people, you know, her dreams, things she was chasing, didn't go after, you know what I mean?
It's so, it's, it's interesting that you guys ended up in a place like that I feel like, you know? It is, yeah. So it was completely, it was, it was, there was nothing in there. There was nothing 
Speaker 2: in there. There was actually another production filming there at the same time as us for, for a couple of, I don't know, for like a week or something?
Honestly, I cannot remember what it was. It was some, I think, independent, low budget I don't even remember what it was. But I remember we had to, I got to be friends with them because we had to work together for so much. But yeah, it was a huge [00:45:00] office building. I mean, like, 50, 000 square feet or something.
So, it had, other people had filmed there before, I know that. Cause obviously other sets were built in there. But, I can't remember how long it had been vacant, but they had been planning to sell it. Cause when we were there, they came a couple of times and did surveys to try to sell it. Because I believe it's like an Amazon.
Speaker: I think it's an Amazon place. Warehouse or something now. They did set extensions on that building too, digitally, right? Because it goes up like really, when the camera Does it? Yeah, when the camera tilts up, it looks like it's like ten floors or something. Yeah, that's right. After Jamie Lee Curtis gets punched in the face and they're calling security.
I think she even says we're on the 10th We're on the 10th floor or something like that. Yeah. Yeah. I mean it's 
Speaker 2: huge. But yeah, it's only two stories 
Speaker: So where did you shoot the? Exterior, but not the alleyway, but the exterior, like, China scenes that she's pulling away in the car. [00:46:00] 
Speaker 2: Oh, we did that in Chinatown.
In Chinatown. Yeah, we did that in Chinatown. 
Speaker: Are there any challenges shooting in Chinatown? 
Speaker 2: There's a ton of challenges. Yeah, well it's just it's a very unique place that you have to You know, deal with a lot of different people who don't quite understand. There's actually a person there who's a former location manager who you, you hire her to kind of be a site rep in a sense, so, cause she knows everybody, so we hired her as a site rep to help with, you know, dealing with talking to all the, because we shot in this, like, kind of an alley, I guess?
And it had some apartments and then some like restaurants, I think, came out to it. So we did have to pay off a bunch of people. You know, most people don't speak English. So, I mean, she doesn't speak Chinese, so I'm not quite sure how she did that either. But You know, it's also, there's absolutely nowhere to park over there.
I mean, it's, it was really challenging. 
Speaker: Well, I even have a hard time parking just to go when I'm in Chinatown, just to park on the [00:47:00] street. You know, I feel like we were talking about the editing a little bit before and beyond just the few kind of core locations here, the IRS building. You know, the Los Angeles theater, things like that.
Then there, because they're going through this multiverse and they're there, there's so many different looks and aesthetics as they go through all these places. And some of them are only on screen for a split. few seconds, maybe. How many locations would you say were in this movie? I mean, if you could estimate, 
Speaker 2: there really weren't that many, which is, you know, surprising.
There were, they did a lot of green screen stuff in the office building for that stuff that was just quick because it was only one dimensional. So they didn't turn around and do a river. So I know they did a bunch of green screen stuff, but there were From what I, from what I heard is there were some stuff too, that they may have gone and, and like stolen them or they shot them in their backyard.
Like I heard that there was this pinata scene that they shot in their backyard during the [00:48:00] pandemic because nobody was filming and everything was shut down. And so they were like, you know, they're, they were really creative in that sense where they could make They could go anywhere and make something look cool.
Like that's one thing that I really liked about them as directors is that cause there's a lot of people out there who make. You know, film and television who don't have vision and can't see like, you know, like I've, I've shot a upscale restaurant in the outdoor cafeteria of a high school and the production designer transformed it.
And that's just the, then the director shot it in a way that it looked really fucking cool. But if you pulled back, it was the shitty fucking nasty. Pigeon poop everywhere location, so if you don't have the vision to see it. It's a lot harder Well, they have I think that they have the vision to be able to see stuff To be able to say if we shoot close up here in our backyard and just point it towards this tree Look at how cool that we can make it seem like we're somewhere [00:49:00] else and that's what they what they did on a lot of those little things because We didn't go to a lot of different locations and do those things.
I mean, we, we went to, like I said, I feel like I'd have to pull out my computer and I will if you want me to. But there were probably maybe 10 locations. 
Speaker: One of the other core locations, of course, is, is Vibiana, right? That's like, I mean, that's amazing. Can you, what is that place now? So, 
Speaker 2: Vibiana apparently once upon a time was a church.
And then Redbird brought, came, Redbird is a is the restaurant that it's attached to. And I can't, I can't remember the name of the company, but they came in and purchased Redbird. They purchased the church, which is kind of connected to it. I don't know if you've ever been to Redbird. It's just fantastic.
It's so good. You should go. It's such a great restaurant downtown. And it has, it even has really cool spaces. Like I've tried to shoot there for other things and just never actually have. But it has two [00:50:00] different looks of their restaurant. that are just badass. And then there's the church that they do for events.
So generally it's a space for just event. It's like an event space or they have weddings there or people do a lot of filming there and everything. But it's like, it's not cheap. It's an expensive location and it was definitely a place that I got yelled at. Because I was given a dollar amount of like, don't go over this, you know, I knew it like I barely had any budget.
And so it was like, okay, well, we can't really afford anything that will end up being like this much. And The problem was is when I saw it, I was like, it's so fucking perfect for this fucking bagel verse That I showed it to the directors anyway And then got yelled at by the producers after when they were like, how much is this place Kelly?
And I was like, oh, you know
And yeah, so I got, I got in trouble for that 
Speaker: one. Well, it's, it's [00:51:00] definitely one of the iconic places from the movie now. I mean, I think, you know, it's been written about, you know, people have talked about it. What I love about the location is that I feel like the location dictates the look of other things that are going on in the scene, like their costumes, specifically Joy's costume because she, or Jobu Tupac, however you want to talk, but what I, what I love about it is that on the altar, location, they're kind of like these almost like spherical, like ball things that are in there's columns.
And then at the top there, these kind of ball looking things. And when you look at her costume, she's got these like pearls. On her face. Yeah, the costume's badass her earrings and on the actual costume. So in a way, I mean, I don't know if that happened, but in a way I feel like the location, like is dictating a lot more, you know, it's a great space.
It's visually amazing, but it's influencing more than just being a place to shoot. It's, it's 
Speaker 2: one of those rare [00:52:00] locations that you go in and they, and like the art department really doesn't have to do anything to it, that you just kind of shoot it the way that it is. I mean, it. It really was just such a perfect backdrop that then other departments could kind of come in and do their thing like, you know, they did atmosphere smoke over the whole floor.
And then, like you said, the costumes and the hair and makeup were so cool. Yes. That because the location was kind of a blank, I mean, I guess it was kind of a blank slate. So there wasn't too much busyness going on that they could create anything busy. Like with the wardrobe or with the hair and makeup.
So it really, I feel like gave them the opportunity to go nuts. 
Speaker: Yeah. So you shot in 2020. So, and then of course, pandemic came like in that time had you had, and then before it came out, like. And you kind of wondered what was going to happen with this movie. Did you kind of forget about it? Like what, what happened in the interim, like for you with this movie?
I 
Speaker 2: definitely [00:53:00] forgot about it just because, you know, end of the world and all that shit. 
Speaker: Yeah. 
Speaker 2: So it was something that kind of escaped my mind. Plus I think when I definitely thought about it too, I was like, I hope they don't just release it and it goes away because people weren't going to the movies, obviously.
So I think it was super smart that they held on to it, you know. Because then, they, when they came out with it, there really wasn't anything good, anything else that was good coming out, because anybody else who made a big movie, like, they had so much money invested that they had to get them out and try to make their money back, whereas this was such a lower budget, and I don't want to say, it's not low budget, we have our rules here in LA, it was not a low budget, it was just a low budget.
But it was lower than most. I think that that benefited them because there wasn't anything else out there like it. Like most of the stuff that came out around them was more like just simple dramas or something. And this kind of was like madness and crazy. And it had so much going on and people had been locked in their houses for a year.
So they got to [00:54:00] come out and escape into these other worlds. 
Speaker: What do you remember thinking when you first saw it? Did you like it? Did you like how the locations came, how the spaces came across? It's 
Speaker 2: weird. Like sometimes when you work on a project, it's hard not to disassociate the working and not to be able to kind of like lose yourself.
So I feel like I enjoyed it more the second time I watched it because you're just like, Oh my God, that location and this and or like I told you, my stepfather died when we were prepping. So for me, it brought up kind of that feeling. So it was sort of like hard to forget and not just think about. working on it until I saw it the second time.
And then when I saw it the second time, that's when I appreciated the movie more. And that's when. I definitely was like, holy shit. I can't believe we've fucking worked on this. You're like, oh my God, it's crazy. Yeah. I liked it when I saw it, I absolutely loved it. 
Speaker: So this movie won best picture. I mean, it's crazy.
Do you feel like your contributions like added to that success of now this best picture winning movie, [00:55:00] that's always going to be a part of it. 
Speaker 2: I think I, I did, but unfortunately I don't think that location managers get. Very much credit. At all. And it's, it's sad because I feel like we are a creative aspect because otherwise you would walk into a location and not recognize it.
Because if you're going to shoot a location the way that it looks, then that's creative because I found it, you know, like I'll read articles where there'll be like the production designer found this great laundromat and you're kind of like, no. Oh, I found that. 
Speaker: Right. 
Speaker 2: Yeah. I actually found it. I mean, I, I don't, you know, our production designer was awesome and I loved him, but it, it is difficult to get credit for it when anything creative about a project, the credit goes to the production designer and the director, the location manager.
Doesn't get credit. And it's one of the reasons why a lot of location managers then get a little, you know I don't want to say we get bitter but it it sucks when you're like I fucking contributed that it's like People are coming to this fucking location and taking a picture [00:56:00] in front of it They're not looking for the stage and going to the stage set.
Yeah, they're looking at the location 
Speaker: well know that I appreciate you guys for sure like I mean you gotta LMGI nomination for this movie, right? I did not win. What won? I don't even remember. I don't know what. James 
Speaker 2: Bond won. Oh, 
Speaker: the Bond film won. Gotcha. So, of course, you know, 
Speaker 2: they filmed on like the fucking Amalfi Coast in Italy.
Yeah, those are fucking gorgeous locations. So, that's the tough thing about, like I was saying earlier with locations, is some people are like, oh, this beautiful house on this cliff in the ocean. Yeah, that's fucking gorgeous. But I'm up against this you know, a laundromat 
Speaker: totally. But you know, the thing is for me, like I was saying before, like this scene that happens in this parking lot up against this space, I think makes more of an impact.
Well, especially on an emotional level, like then being on a blue, beautiful house, overlooking a cliff. I mean, I don't know. That's my, that's my opinion when I watched it again last night. I mean, that scene at the end here, [00:57:00] my gosh, and that's this place. It's going to be here. Like, And I love people can come and visit this like so what I mean It's also more accessible like 
Speaker 2: with the LMGI that was in August I think and so the movie had barely been out and people probably hadn't really seen it yet So it wasn't it hadn't gotten that cult Status yeah, yeah, so That's probably why I think that like, even my husband was like, do you realize that if the LMGIs were after the Oscars, you would have probably won the LMGI award.
I'm like, yeah, I mean, I don't know. Maybe like, like I couldn't even, we have two awards. We have the LMGIs and then there's the On Location Awards, but the On Location Awards, which I think is a mistake is they only let you submit for the year that you shot it. Well, I would have had to submit in 2020 before it came out and everybody, nobody would have obviously.
Cause they're like, what the fuck is everything all at once? Yeah, I couldn't we, we tried. We were like, Oh, let's submit ourselves for an on location award. And we cut it. 
Speaker: So the movie premiered at [00:58:00] South by Southwest and. 2022, which is March. And then, you know, started hearing about this movie. I know I was like, what is this?
What is, what is this movie? What's going on? And then, you know, really started to pick up steam. At what point did you start to hear that people were like going to visit, like coming to the laundromat in San Fernando? I didn't 
Speaker 2: know they were doing that until there was that LA Times article. I didn't know people were doing that until I read that article.
I had no idea. 
Speaker: Well, I mean, what does that mean to you that? I think 
Speaker 2: it's really cool. 
Speaker: Yeah, 
Speaker 2: it's really cool. You know, it's awesome. Especially too because it's like I don't think people are nothing against James Bond That was a beautiful movie, but nobody's going to the Amalfi Coast because James Bond shot there They're just not you know, there are some shows people do go to like where Game of Thrones was shot.
Some people do that So I think it's really cool when the fact that like I found this location and it had never been shot before, which is super cool. And that people are connecting that [00:59:00] much to the location. 
Speaker: Yeah. Now, 
Speaker 2: sadly, I don't think they're coming and going, Who's the location manager? I don't think any of those people that come here know who I am.
Speaker: Well, that's why I like doing these things, you know? That's why I like doing this stuff. So I noticed that actually the, the laundromat has a thank you in the end credits. Is that something, were you involved at all with that? Trying, or like, what's the, and is that typical for a location to get a thank you in the credits?
No, that's 
Speaker 2: not typical at all. And that was not. In the contract. And that wasn't something we discussed at all. I think that just goes to show you of how great these people were. The producers and the directors. That to them knowing how important it was. That they, I think they must have chosen themselves to do that.
Which was really cool. 
Speaker: It's very cool. So right now I want to bring in the business owner here at Majors coin laundry. I want to bring in Kenny Majors. How's it going today, Kenny? Doing good. Thank you. Good. Thanks for having us here today. Oh, you're more than welcome. Very happy to be here. Like, especially after just watching the movie again last night.
So, I [01:00:00] guess I'm interested to hear kind of from both of your perspectives, like, what you remember about the first time, like, Kelly, you walking in there, meeting Kenny. And then vice versa, what you like, remember about what you're being told they may want to do here. 
Speaker 2: I think Kenny, you tried to tell me to get out, right?
Yeah. I'm kidding, I don't remember. Maybe, 
Speaker 4: yeah. No. I think so, because I was going through a lawsuit at the time. Oh 
Speaker 2: yeah, I had to talk, I had to really talk Kenny into it. 
Speaker 4: So you thought she 
Speaker: was part, she was like part of that, the lawsuit, she was coming in to do something. Yeah, coming in to take 
Speaker 4: pictures.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, did I, did I not, did I just start taking pictures and not talk to you? No, I think you told me, but I was still 
Speaker 4: skeptical about it. But I was like, oh, no, I think I asked you for your business card. Yeah. I think I even verified it with another friend that's a scout locator and I said, is this person legit?
And he said, yes. So then I said, okay. Because at the time I was going through a lawsuit and I thought, oh, there's some coming in to take more pictures for legal reasons or something. And then it kind of had me on edge. 
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had to talk Kenny into 
Speaker 4: it. Because it wasn't a 
Speaker 2: [01:01:00] lot to ask. I mean, I was like, hey, so we're going to come shut you down for a week.
Zach, will you let us do that? 
Speaker: Were you surprised he was like, yeah, 
Speaker 2: I don't think he said yes right away. 
Speaker 4: No, I, I think I told you after I found out your religion, I said, well, if you pay me enough to close my business to lose customers and then help cover the lot, you know what I'm going through, then I can probably, then I can do it.
Gotcha. 
Speaker 2: We talked, we did, you know, it was money. We talked about money. And I had to explain to him really what the deal was. Cause obviously it's a big deal. Shutting a business down for an entire week is a really, really big deal. And I knew that was going to be a challenge. Like I, there were probably other laundromats who were like, you know, fuck off.
No, but but no, we, you know, we talked it through and also like, you know, obviously we were going to take care of them. If we, if we were, if we damaged anything, we would fix it. And clean up our mess. Cause we always leave a mess. It was a, it was a big mess was such a mess. It was a 
Speaker 4: real [01:02:00] big mess and I, I had to pull a whole, all nighter here after you guys left.
I know, 
Speaker 2: I don't know why you did. We came, we were coming back the next day and stuff. No, I had to open up 
Speaker 4: at 5 a. m. 
Speaker 2: Yes, Kenny made the mistake of being like, your last shoot day here, I'm gonna open up the next day. And the last day was a night shoot. So we were here, what, how late were we here? 
Speaker 4: To like, past midnight.
Midnight? And I had to open up at 5 a. m. on a Sunday, oh Saturday or Sunday? Saturday. Saturday was my busiest day of the week. And then we came in while he was 
Speaker 2: open. Right, and we like struck out and changed things back and like I had my guys come in and clean. They came 
Speaker 4: in around 10 o'clock in the afternoon, I think, or I had to clean up, you know, the folding tables had all that rust paint on them, so I had to clean all that off.
I know, we would have done all that. I know you guys would have. Kenny's impatient. Not impatient. We weren't going to do it all, but 
Speaker 2: Kenny did, like, kind of step in. I had, 
Speaker 4: no, I was, after you guys left I, I put my hands across the folding tables and I seen all the paint come off of my hands. Yeah, we 
Speaker 2: So I was like, oh 
Speaker 4: no, customers folding their clothes.
Oh yeah, right. 
Speaker 2: We had to age some stuff. [01:03:00] So it's not going to be acceptable. Yeah, it's definitely a challenge. It was one of those things too where it was like. If we had money, I would have just paid him to stay close so we could strike. But we didn't have that kind of money. I mean, it was definitely already a lot.
So it was, it was something that we discussed that he was like, as soon as you're done filming, I want to be able to open. And so we were able to work it out, but it's hard to do that. Like it's such a logistical like challenge to be like, yeah, have people come in here and then we'll work around them. So that was hard.
Speaker 4: It was funny seeing customers like walk. Doing laundry with all the decorations and all the setup and all the signs I'm like they were just doing laundry on a movie set I mean if that how they know now what all the huge success of the movie I mean, they would have took pictures and videos right doing laundry in a movie set Yeah, but 
Speaker 2: at the time people are like they didn't get out of my way 
Speaker: Yeah, and I'm curious like when you close down your laundry room.
I'm sure this is like A go to place for people. I mean, [01:04:00] this is, I'm sure you, the same people come and do their laundry here. I mean, there are other laundry mats, I'm sure, but is that an inconvenience? Like, do you feel like for people, let's say that live right here and like, this is their spot? 
Speaker 4: That is their spot.
And the way I look at it is that you got to make it worth my while. Like when I said, okay, if I close down and I lose one customer, it goes to another laundromat and they like that other laundromat better. I lose that customer. 
Speaker 2: We also gave you, we gave you money and they, when they came to try to do laundry, we I gave him a coupon for a free wash.
Oh, interesting. So I wouldn't lose that customer. So in addition to paying for the location, we also gave him money to be like, to pay customers so they would come back. 
Speaker 4: Cool. I didn't want to risk losing a customer to another laundromat. And then that's like a thousand bucks a year. Yeah. Ten customers, ten grand.
It just defeats the whole purpose. Right. So I had to keep that, when they would pull up and they had their laundry in the car, I would go out and give them a coupon. How long have you owned the spot? I've been here 26 years. It's built, it's been here 40 years. Are you a movie fan? Yes. You like movies. Was it [01:05:00] exciting for you?
Very exciting. Something, it was way different from the 
Speaker: norm for me, so And, what did you think of the movie when you first saw it? And what did you think about how your place looks in it? 
Speaker 4: It represented my place really good. I liked it a lot. It was, I was Wish I had a pause button to rewind like I was I think I was just in shock like all the scenes of the laundromat and so Couldn't rewind it as I got I have to wait for the DVD to come out So well, especially for like 
Speaker: the like the Chinese New Year stuff right with all the decorations Yeah, I mean they did a great job with all that stuff in there.
Speaker 2: Yeah I think we ended up like that since that was a night shoot They had to come in early at that day to decorate to, you know, reset the whole thing. So like Friday was the, the the night shoot. So the prep crew came in during daylight hours and transformed the place for the party so then we could shoot it.
Speaker: When you saw it the first time, did you watch it all the way through and see your name thing, the company at the end? Yeah, I, I, I definitely did. You know that was gonna happen. [01:06:00] 
Speaker 4: No, I was, I was thrilled. I was yeah, I was looking for it. You were looking for it. You had a hope that that would be there when I saw it right in the middle.
I was like, okay, nice. Nice. That is cool. No, it's great. Picture in the movie theater with my cell phone. That's 
Speaker: awesome. After the movie came out, did you start noticing people coming, fans, maybe taking pictures? 
Speaker 4: We might see somebody coming today, but it's like often there's somebody coming by and taking pictures.
Do you, 
Speaker: do they come 
Speaker 4: inside and look around too? They come inside, take pictures. Sometimes they'll ask me, is it okay if I take pictures? I say, yeah, just try not to take pictures of the customers. Yeah, and if You want to buy something from the vending machine or something because it helps support small business, but totally so so you're you're welcoming the fans I'm welcome coming as long as they come in and buy something from the soda machine the snack machine Or are they surprised 
Speaker: to learn that 
Speaker 4: there's actually not a second floor some people ask.
Hey, where's the apartment upstairs? There's like I think it's CGI, right? Yeah, yeah. Yeah. I would like an [01:07:00] apartment upstairs so I can Just go to sleep, go upstairs. Yeah, when I'm, instead of going home to take a nap or something, I just go upstairs. It'd be really nice. Or if somebody called me with a problem, I just Okay, I'll be down in one minute.
Yeah. 
Speaker: What do you think about the fact, though, that like, your place is in You know, it's been immortalized now on, on film. It's a main location in a best picture winning film. 
Speaker 4: I'm shocked. It's crazy. It's ready for the next the next project. Kelly. Well, I'll know a lot more. I have more experience. Well, I mean, you said you would totally like, depending on the project, you would, you would, 
Speaker 2: you 
Speaker 4: would, yeah, just like when you wanted to do the podcast, I was like for Kelly, I'll do it.
Yeah, 
Speaker: that's awesome. That's really nice. Has it since then has anybody else approached you about shooting here? Yeah, you've had some other other commercials commercials. Cool. All right one. I can't 
Speaker 4: talk about it because it hasn't came out Okay, another one was with Matthew McConaughey. Oh Really?
Salesforce. So that's how he was sitting right here another Oscar winner. [01:08:00] Yeah in this laundry wild man And got a picture with them outside This one, I asked him, I said, can I get a picture with you, Matthew? And he's like, who are you? I said, I own this lounging mat. And then he's like, Oh yeah, for continuity, for continuity.
What are 
Speaker: you 
Speaker 4: talking 
Speaker: about? That's awesome, man. That's super cool. And then you told me you're getting. You're getting some shirts made up? Yes, I am for the spot. So I'll be here 
Speaker 4: in a couple weeks probably. 
Speaker: That's awesome. So when people come by and start taking pictures, you're like, here we got, I, I have shirts 
Speaker 4: available and laundry bags.
The laundry bags I have. Oh, you're doing laundry bags Also, the laundry bags are gonna be a different design also with the, with the googly eye. That's awesome, man. So, yeah, I got pro. I gotta, I gotta capitalize on or monetize it. It's some way or another. That's 
Speaker: a great idea. I love the bag with the googly eyes on it.
Kenny, thanks again. Just. For letting us be here today Really, really, really appreciate it. I'm going to come back and grab one of those shirts once they're available. So we'll have to check it out on my, I have to keep in touch [01:09:00] Instagram page. I'll check it out. And it's so super cool that it's in this movie and people can come here to San Fernando to check it out.
And, kelly, just thank you for being here today and doing this, coming back, coming back up to San Fernando to Major's Coin Laundry. And I think you did a terrific job on this movie. I mean, you know, again, I know we talked about how it's kind of a thankless position that location managers have. But know that I appreciate it, and I think it, it came out great, so.
Thank 
Speaker 3: you. 
Speaker: And to everyone listening, you know, I know it's been some time since our last episode. It was over like a year ago that I did my last episode, but, you know, sometimes life just gets life gets stuck in the way, and you just gotta try not to let that everything bagel suck you in, you know, so so thanks for joining us on location, and, and we'll see you next [01:10:00] time.