Speaker: [00:00:00] Hi, this is Larry Mantel. Our 23rd annual Film Week Academy Awards preview is back on Saturday, February 22nd at the Alex Theatre in Glendale. Get your tickets now at laist. com slash events. 
Speaker 2: I'm Franklin Leonard, host of a new podcast from The Blacklist. What makes a blockbuster or a box office bomb? The truth is nobody knows anything.
We'll prove it with the help of our famous friends. Listen to Nobody Knows Anything wherever you get your podcasts. Presented by fx. 
Speaker 3: Hello, beautiful people. We're working on a new episodes for you, so we're bringing you an oldie but goodie from the archives. I hung out with the homie Alex Catrell, AKA la try guy on Instagram and TikTok.
He's a transplant that has explored Southern California through his best foods via recommendations from his followers. I'm bringing back this episode because I'd loved hanging out with him in Westchester and Inglewood. It's super close to LAX. So you [00:01:00] might want to save these recommendations for the next time you go to the airport.
Alrighty y'all let's dig into the episode. 
Speaker 4: Yes Lord. Y'all got the sauce too? He's going to be in for a real surprise. I'm telling you, this is about to make him turn a backflip out here in the parking lot. From 
Speaker 3: LA Studios, this is How to LA. I'm Brian De Los Santos. 
Speaker 4: I'll take my own here. Have a seat, my guy.
Speaker 3: If you've been listening to the show for a while, you know we love food. It's so tender and juicy. Everything that's dipped in. God. Well, today, we're hanging out with someone who also loves food. 
Speaker 4: What's up, guys? My name is Alex, the LA Try Guy, man. We out here in the city. city and I'm excited to 
Speaker 3: be here dawg.
And I'm Brian De Los Santos. I know I can't, I haven't had my coffee. I haven't had my breakfast. We're here on a weekday. Alex Cottrell is something of a budding legend on LA's food scene. I love you. 
Speaker 5: I'm as tall as you all the time. Man, I [00:02:00] appreciate you so much. Listen, we go everywhere you recommend, so he's gonna love this.
So 
Speaker 3: I want to take some time to check out some restaurants, eat some grub, and Talk about L.A.'s massive food culture with someone who loves food as much as we do. 
Speaker 4: Everybody in L.A. think they got the best catfish, the best pie, drink the best this and that, man. Restaurant owners, they're really hyped up about their baby because this thing is their baby, you know.
Speaker 3: We're calling this segment Down to Feast with the L.A. Try Guy. If you need someone to fall in love with you, get them a chicken sausage sandwich. You know, 
Speaker 4: nice, easy work. 
Speaker 3: And for our first one, I'm taking Alex to one of my favorite diners in the city in Westchester. That's 
Speaker 4: a solid sausage. You wouldn't even know that's chicken, man.
You know, I feel, I feel a little bit better about myself for eating this. You know what I mean? 
Speaker 3: Then, 
Speaker 4: I've never been here 
Speaker 3: before. Alex is taking me to his favorite spot in the area. You can make tacos out of this. a sandwich. It's just so[00:03:00] 
what part of town are we This is West Chester. Cof Chester. Super close to L of businesses that cater
I lived five minutes away from here when I didn't want to make breakfast when I make my own latte at home. This was my spot. The secret to this place is you don't want to wait in line during brunch hour or during breakfast hour. You come and you order at the, at the stand or we're going to go to right now.
And I'm excited to show Alex a really good chicken sausage sandwich here in the city of LA. 
Speaker 4: Chicken sausage, man. A lot of people be saying that chicken sausage is like the boo out here in LA, man. I didn't really 
Speaker 3: eat that where I'm from. A fun, fun fact, uh, we did a whole thing about chicken sausage, uh, a year ago.
It was definitely influenced by the South, but here is where a lot of families started making it, started making business out of it. So it definitely has its grip on LA culture. 
Speaker 4: I'm [00:04:00] excited dog. A lot of people tag this place for sure. I may have been here maybe one time, a long time ago. I don't remember nothing about it.
So I'm starting with a fresh slate today. 
Speaker 6: Alright, this is my homie. He always takes care of me. Hey, my name is William and we're the coffee company right now. Showing you guys the, uh, sandwiches that we have. Uh, what do I normally get? You get the, uh, spicy chicken sausage sandwich. I didn't know you ordered here already.
It's spicy though. 
Speaker 4: Spicy? Yeah. Okay, okay, okay. Spice type of guy. I'm good with spice, man. I'm cool with spice, though. Okay, cool. So wait, are you a fan of this? I mean, look, Brian, he might be a little biased, man. You've talked to me. Are you a fan of this, uh, spicy 
Speaker 6: chicken sausage sandwich or what? That's a best chicken that we have here.
It's not spicy at all, but it's really good. It's really good. That's 
Speaker 4: the 
Speaker 6: move. It's unique. You don't find it anywhere else. Okay. I'm holding you to that, dog. I'm holding you to that, 
Speaker 4: man. 
Speaker 3: Well, first things first, uh, what 
Speaker 4: inspired you to start your channels? Dude, I was working [00:05:00] corporate in tech, like tech sales for a company called Cloud Kitchens.
They take these big buildings and they put like 30 commercial kitchens inside and I used to rent those kitchens to like restauranteurs, uh, franchises, all that kind of stuff to just do like pickup, takeout, delivery. So you've probably seen these kitchens around. But I was already working with restaurants and I was like, man, how can I get out and like make some extra cash?
And I was like, oh, social media. So I literally started doing food reviews, man. And, uh, it went crazy. I was able to leave my corporate job last August and do this full time now. So I've been blessed, man, for sure.
Speaker 3: Um, you highlight so much of LA that people want to do or want to try. How do you do it? 
Speaker 4: Yeah, I don't know. I'll tell everybody, like I'm not from here, bro. Like I literally, I came here in 2020, I started doing content last year. I started going to places that. You know, I grew up like eating those types of foods.
So I was looking for like, you know, fried chicken and [00:06:00] catfish and Knoxville and all that kind of stuff. You know, I didn't know the areas that I was going to, but now when I go down there, you know, those are communities that were kind of starved for content. There were no influencers going down to South LA and Compton and all these different places, man.
And, but me, I didn't even know where I was. I was just going to get some good 
Speaker 3: food. So going back to where you're saying you went from hobby to like an actual job. When someone's like thinking about. Doing this for their actual money income, what would you tell them? Like, oh, this is some of the things that you should think about when you're doing this, uh, this play of like, I want to highlight restaurants and food, but I also want to get some income.
What would you tell them? I'd say 
Speaker 4: create as many arms of revenue as possible, man. Like there's people who want to pay me obviously to bring business to their restaurants. There's ways to make money just on Google ads. It's like the views on YouTube. You can make money from the views on Tik TOK. You can sell ads on your YouTube channel.
You can do brand deals with companies like I do everything, [00:07:00] man. I've been making money with content since I had 5, 000 followers, man. And you know, we just hit 500k on YouTube literally like a day ago. You know, thank you guys so much for that. You know, I'm at like 170 something on IG. So I still really consider myself like small time, but I've been monetizing this thing since I had like 5, 000 followers, man.
But that's the background I come from. Everybody doesn't come from a sales background like 
Speaker 3: me. Yeah. Before we get to the food, one more question. You get a lot of comments, a lot of reactions. How do you choose the places when you have like someone saying, Hey, no, this is the best catfish. No, this is the best taco here.
Like how do you decipher all of that? And be like, nah, I'm gonna do this. 
Speaker 7: Yeah. 
Speaker 4: Nah. First I'll tell you this, man. Everybody in LA think they got the best catfish, the best fries. They get the best this and that man, restaurant owners. They're really hyped up about their baby because this thing is their baby, man.
So I do find enjoyment in Highlighting these people's like, you know, the restaurants like the children I go to a lot of places that I like Uh, [00:08:00] or just like if I see something online real quick and it looks good. I'm like, yo, let's go there like a lot of times I'll show up like randomly. Like I won't even like schedule it or anything.
I just like to come like everybody else do my thing. We get in, we get out, you know, you'll never see me do reviews like in my car and anything, cause I like actually being at the restaurant like this. So if I came here without you today, I would still sit down and like. eat. We still had a camera. We still be talking to people like I love just being out in the community, man.
That's what really gives me joy. You ready to grub? Let's grub, man. I see they sitting over there with the sandwiches right now. Like, man, where y'all gonna stop talking, man? Where the chicken sausage? Whenever we get a piece of food, I always get like beauty shots of it, you know, so people can see it. This looks amazing, by the way, bro.
Speaker 7: Yeah. 
Speaker 4: Got a nice little char. I mean, y'all can't, y'all can't see it right now, but they got a nice little char on the chicken sausage. The eggs look nice and fluffy, you know, a little, little brioche bun type of thing. I don't know what this orange spice is, though. What is this for, like? No, no, that's 
Speaker 3: for later, that's for later.
Oh, this is like a palate cleanser? No, it's a palate cleanser at the [00:09:00] end. By the way, Alex is gonna have all this yummy food on video, so follow him on Instagram and on YouTube, LATryGuy. My thing is I like to add a little bit of Cholula and 
Speaker 4: ketchup. I trust this guy already. Y'all know I like hot sauce on everything, man.
Now the ketchup, I don't know. Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. Wait a minute. That chicken sausage is special, man. That chicken sausage is special. That's a game changer, dog. Excuse me. Let me chew my food. People always comment like, Yo, chew your food. Swallow before you start talking. Nice pop from the sausage. Like, literally, as soon as you bite into it, you get that pop right there.
Great. I love how they charred it. Seasoned very well. That's a solid sausage, y'all. You wouldn't even know that's chicken, man. You know, I feel a little bit better about myself for eating this, you know what I mean? The eggs cook perfectly, very soft. The bun's cool. I think everything works well together, man.
I'm still [00:10:00] trying to figure out what the orange is for, though, man. 
Speaker 7: I'm telling you, that's at the end. A little dessert, a little dessert. Alright, now 
Speaker 3: imagine you're hungover. You went to sleep at 4 in the morning. You stumble onto this place at 11 in the morning. First bite, you're like, oh, heaven. You know?
This is my spot, my little hangover spot. Time 
Speaker 4: out, wait a minute. So you gotta tell me, bro. How did you discover this spot in the first place? 
Speaker 3: Um, Uh, Me and my ex? Um, he lives around here and he showed me this spot. He was like, oh let's go get chicken sandwiches. And I'm like, okay, I didn't know what to expect.
We came here, we got to go, we're gonna move back home. I'm like, oh, this is amaz person. I love to eat bre at night for lunch. It's So 
Speaker 4: for those of you guys someone to fall in love w
Speaker 5: My name is Carolyn and this is our place to come for [00:11:00] breakfast as well as brunch. I love it, the hospitality, the food is excellent. 
Speaker 3: What is your favorite thing on the menu? 
Speaker 5: I usually like the grilled salmon and the grits are just right. We come here once a month or every other month and for special occasions.
Today is my brother's birthday and my husband will always say, well, let's go to the coffee company. 
Speaker 3: People just come here with family, which is what I love. You know, people come here, like you see the grandmas and the babies at the same time. It just, it does have a sense of a small community restaurant.
Speaker 4: Most definitely. I think it's cool, man, in the airport sound like this, when there's lots of travelers coming through, there's lots of quick options, but you walk in here, it's like a whole nother world, man, compared to like everything else in this town, you know? Um, like, I feel like I'm walking in like a little Arkansas joint, man.
You know, I might see my grandma walk around the corner real quick. 
Speaker 3: How do you feel as a Southerner in LA? Because, like, I [00:12:00] feel like The culture in L.A. is different from any major city, but also I feel like black culture in L.A. is very specific to L.A. Like, how do you fit into the, from your southern roots to being here in L.
A.? 
Speaker 4: I don't know. I feel like, even back where I'm from, people still ask me where I'm from, you know? I'm in Arkansas. I grew up in Arkansas. People would be like, man, are you from up north? I grew up in the hood of, like, Arkansas, you know what I mean? Around nothing but, like, straight hood stuff. And anything that was different out there was You know what I mean?
I was made fun of for the way that I talk, for the things that I like, all that kind of stuff, man. So, but, you know, it's things that shape me. Uh, to be who I am to this day, man. So, I love everything, dawg. I love the West Coast. I love the South. Man, I love L.A. Alright, dawg, look. This chicken sausage was pretty fire, dawg.
I appreciate you for bringing me on. But, you know, my place, you know, I'm about to take you somewhere. It's gonna blow you out of the water, dawg. It's about to be crazy, dawg. It's called Hungry Joe's. How far is it [00:13:00] from here? Ten minutes. 
Speaker 3: I love the sound of that. Cause you know L.A. traffic. You know L.A.
traffic. It's straight up ten minutes, I think. Hold on, it was ten minutes when I looked the other day.
Speaker 7: I 
Speaker 4: forgot I got music out here, man, but, uh, I already ordered though. This one's on me. Don't worry. I'll take you to my joint. You know. Yeah, just in case you don't like it, you won't be like, man, I spent my money on it. I feel a little honored today. No one ever pays for me. Yeah, this, this is my recommendation, man.
This, um, this is me. We got two oxtail plates and I got you a beef patty, man. You like beef patties? 
Speaker 3: We'll see how much we can scarf down after, after mostly a full chicken sandwich. The food's gonna be out in just a minute, so let's take a quick break while we can, and we'll be back to try some oxtail with Alex.
Speaker 8: We love LA, but we know it isn't perfect. [00:14:00] LAist is here to keep you informed so you can hold those in power to account. Our reporters are keeping an eye on the climate, schools, infrastructure, and so much more to make sure you have all the information you need to understand the complex issues of We check in on public officials work to make sure they are fulfilling their obligations.
Keep track on what's happening in L.A. and the O.C. with the Morning and Afternoon L.A. Report Newsletter. Sign up at LAist. com slash newsletter. 
Speaker: Hi, this is Larry Mantle. The 23rd Annual Film Week Academy Awards Preview is coming right up on Saturday, February 22nd at the historic Alex Theatre in Glendale.
I'll be there with all of our critics on stage, watching clips of the Oscar nominated films, and talking over all the major categories. Make sure you're there. It's part of our AirTalk 40th Anniversary Tour. The 23rd Annual Film Week Academy Awards Preview at the Alex. Tickets at laist. com slash events.[00:15:00] 
Speaker 4: This is How to L.A. with Brian De Los Santos. And with L.A. Try Guy, Alex Cottrell. Hungry Joes, man. If y'all know Hungry Joes. This was like the first, like, celebrity collab we ever did, man. You know, we get a lot of people who follow the page and whatnot. And I get DMs and stuff from, like, all types of people.
Just like, yo, you need to go try this or go try this. You know, cause I think food is what, like, connects everybody, man. Everybody's got their favorite whatever, man. So, NBA legend Paul Pierce, man. Paul had DM'd us. It was like, Hey, uh, y'all need to go try Hungry Joe's, man. I grew up around that area and I was like, all right, bet if you come with me and he was like, okay.
And literally we showed up and I was like, man, I hope this guy like actually shows up, man. And he did, you know, we had a great time, man. We had a great time. So yeah, since then we've done like stuff with like artists around here. Uh, J Rock. Amore, Kaylin Forreal Forreal. Uh, we just did Robert Rashard, he's an actor.
He's been in a lot of stuff. While we did [00:16:00] MookieBets from the Dodgers, uh, we met up in Constant, you know. It's cool, man, to, you know, be out experiencing, like, L.A. and food with all these people that, you know, you think are kind of, like, untouchable, but, like, they're regular people just like us, too, and they have, like, their favorite thing around here.
Sweet, I like that. That's going in the podcast, by the way. Oh, that's, that's us! Alright, sorry, uh, interruption. Let me get the oxygen. So I got y'all
got the patties in there too, right? Yeah, y'all got the sauce too. Oh, yeah, he's gonna be in for a real surprise. I'm telling you. This is about to make him turn a backflip out here in the parking lot. Thank you, brother. Indeed.
That's what we got here, man. I got it. Two oxtail plates, you know, uh, let me get in here real quick. Oh, hold on. Yes, sir. That's the move right there. You know what I mean? Look at that. Beautiful. [00:17:00] Beautiful. That's yours. You take that. Okay. Now I'll take my own here. Have a seat, have a seat, my guy. All right, so presentation wise, how's it looking for you 
Speaker 3: already?
Like the, the Umo, what is it called? The steam. Uh, this is really rich. I love me some plantains. 
Speaker 4: The best part about this is the gravy, man. It's like, it's like liquid gold, bro. It's insane. Okay, so I'm gonna just let you get into it, man. You know, give, give a little taste. 
Speaker 3: It's so tender and juicy. The gravy the everything that's it's dipped in God you can make tacos out of this Sandwich it's just so good.
This tastes like home cooking and that's what I love about restaurants that are like mom and pops. So Perfect. Perfect. 
Speaker 4: They don't sacrifice on the quality, man. And that's, that's one thing I love it. That's why I go to so many of them, man. These are literal, you know, families back here in the [00:18:00] kitchen, like cooking this stuff up, you know what I mean?
I really love that about LA. You know, I'm able to experience so many different cultures out here, man. Different cultures and cuisine types, man. Stuff that I've never tried before I came to this city, man. And that's why LA is always gonna have a special place in my heart, bro. Seriously. Now get some hot sauce right there.
Oh, there's a hot sauce on it, man. There's a hot sauce on it, dawg. 
Speaker 3: Oh, you had a little secret ingredient, huh? 
Speaker 4: Ooh, you can smell it. It's already It's a little spicy, though. I will say it's a little spicy. I'm just gonna try just a little bit, just cause you, 
Speaker 3: just cause you told me, you know? And, and, how, what was the damage on, on each plate?
Speaker 4: Yeah, 21 bucks per plate. 
Speaker 3: This is like a good, um, 
Speaker 4: lunch 
Speaker 3: and 
Speaker 4: dinner. That's a lot of food though, man. This is a huge portion, you know? And then, um, the beef patties are 4 bucks each. About 4 bucks each. And that's what you're about to try next, the beef patty. 
Speaker 7: Mmm. Mmm. 
Speaker 4: No words. 
Speaker 3: I think this [00:19:00] is my favorite one, I'm sorry.
I love, I love the oxtail, but this is just, ah, this is a good snack. Now these at 4am after 
Speaker 4: a long night. Mmm. They'll get you there. Mmm.
Speaker 3: A big thank you to Alex Cottrell, L.A. Try Guy, for showing me around and bringing me to a beautiful, delicious spot today. 
Speaker 4: Oh man, thank you! Thank you for showing me the chicken sausages, man. You know, I knew it was gonna be fire if it was coming from the mind of Brian, man, for sure. Man, I appreciate you guys, dawg.
Speaker 3: This episode was produced by Evan Jacoby. Our other producers are Megan Botel, Monica Bushman, and Victoria Alejandro. Support for this podcast is made possible by Gordon and Donna Crawford, who believe that quality journalism makes Los Angeles a better place to live.[00:20:00] 
Speaker 9: Hey, it's Francis Lam, host of the Splendid Table. You know, it's the 30th anniversary of our show, which is all about the intersection of food and life. And what better place to celebrate that than in L.A.? We'll be talking with superstars of L.A. food writing, as well as some great local chefs. And after the show, we'll all get some delicious bites from nearby Farbar.
So join us March 23rd at the Aratani Theater in Little Tokyo. Get your tickets now at laist.com slash events.