Speaker: [00:00:00] Trading at Schwab is now powered by Ameritrade, bringing you an expanding library of education with even more ways to sharpen your trading skills. Access new online courses, insightful webcasts, articles, engaging videos, and more, all curated just for traders. Plus, guided learning paths with content designed to fit your unique interests.
No sifting to find exactly what you need so you can spend your time learning to trade brilliantly. Learn more at www. schwab. com. Trading. 
Speaker 2: And now, a next level moment from AT& T Business. Say you've sent out a gigantic shipment of pillows, and they need to be there in time for International Sleep Day.
You've got AT& T 5G, so you're fully confident. But, the vendor isn't responding, and International Sleep Day is tomorrow. Luckily, AT& T 5G lets you deal with any issues with ease, so the pillows will get delivered and everyone can sleep soundly. Especially you. AT& T 5G requires a compatible plan and device, coverage not available everywhere.
Learn more at att. com slash 5G network. [00:01:00] 
Speaker 3: The Bowery Boys episode 449, Italian Harlem, New York's forgotten little Italy. Hey, it's the Bowery Boys. Hey.
Hi there. Welcome to the Bowery Boys. This is Greg Young. And this is Tom Myers. And today, we're going to spend some time telling the story of one of the first American neighborhoods to ever be referred to as Little Italy. That's right. 
Speaker 5: And, spoiler alert, This isn't the one that's located downtown on Mulberry Street.
Now, 
Speaker 3: this Little Italy, one of the earliest Italian enclaves in this country, was located more than six miles north of that Little Italy, the more recognizable one. This one was in Harlem. 
Speaker 5: [00:02:00] in East Harlem. Starting in the late 1870s, so almost 150 years ago, Italian immigrants from mostly the southern areas of Italy began immigrating to New York.
Many settled downtown around the area of today's touristy Little Italy, but many also settled in East Harlem, in an area that today you might call Spanish Harlem or El Barrio, named for its Puerto Rican residents. Italian 
Speaker 3: Harlem, I think we could say, is a forgotten or nearly vanished neighborhood from Old New York, today represented by only a scant number of landmarks on a couple streets near the East River.
But I bet if you wander around Any modern neighborhood with a strong Italian presence in this region, South Brooklyn, Staten Island, New Jersey, what have you, you'll find yourself around people who can [00:03:00] trace their lineage back through the streets of this area, 
Speaker 5: Italian Harlem, including perhaps many of you listening right now, because at one point, more than 100, 000 Italian New Yorkers lived in East Harlem.
It was a community that was centered around a very special house of worship with direct roots to Catholic traditions from Southern Italy. 
Speaker 3: So who were these Italian settlers, I guess, pioneers of sorts, who left their homes for what would become a pretty hard urban life in Upper Manhattan here along the East River?
What drew them to the city? What traditions did they bring? In the end, what did they leave behind, as so many of them would eventually move out of Upper Manhattan? 
Speaker 5: Sauce. Yes, they, yes, okay, they would bring sauce, yes. But, but not just pasta sauce. Yes, Italian Harlem gave New York amazing pizza, but it also [00:04:00] gave us important reforms in public education, and it even gave us one of the greatest New Yorkers who ever lived.
Wow, quite a statement. That 
Speaker 3: is quite a statement, but it's true. We're going to prove it on this show now because we are talking about a somewhat obscure and possibly even forgotten enclave. Many of you may never have heard of this. Perhaps we should properly situate the listener here. So where. And also, you know, Harlem's kind of a big place.
So where exactly in Harlem are we talking about? 
Speaker 5: Yeah, it's worth repeating that Italian Harlem was located in today's East Harlem, in Upper Manhattan. And as I said, this neighborhood is today also called Spanish Harlem and El Barrio. And it's usually defined as the blocks that are East of Fifth Avenue and north of 96th Street.
Speaker 3: And stretching all the way north to, you know, around 125th Street. You know, that bend where it 
Speaker 5: hits the Harlem [00:05:00] River. That's right. And its eastern edge is, of course, the East River. Today, the neighborhood is home to about 115, 000 New Yorkers. Italian Harlem would initially only occupy part of East Harlem.
You know, the blocks that are roughly around 110th Street, but in its heyday in the early 20th century into the 1920s, it would expand up and down to 96th Street. And of course, you know, 
Speaker 3: broadening our picture out a little bit. East Harlem is just one part of Harlem proper on the other side of Fifth Avenue to the West and North.
of Central Park at 110th Street is Central Harlem, and its western border is Morningside Park. 
Speaker 5: Yes, and then west of Central Harlem and north of 125th Street is West Harlem, which stretches up the west side to 155th Street. But today 
Speaker 3: we're focusing [00:06:00] on just the blocks east of 5th Avenue, to simplify that.
And also, I'll just quickly point out that in last year's miniseries in the Netherlands, remember when we did that, you and I and producer Kieran spent an entire day running around, not Harlem, but the original Harlem. In the Netherlands, with two A's. 
Speaker 5: Yes, I think I even bought some ye olde mysterious medicinal drops from the pharmacy that you doing with 
Speaker 3: that?
Speaker 5: You know, maybe that's, I took them and maybe that's why I don't remember a thing after we arrived in, in Harlem. Okay. Or on the entire flight home. But anyway, we digress. 
Speaker 3: But that original Harlem in the Netherlands would inspire, at least in name, an actual settlement in Dutch New Amsterdam here in the 17th century called New Harlem.
So, [00:07:00] where was New Harlem? Was 
Speaker 5: that part of East Harlem? It was, in fact, yes. I was looking at a map of New Harlem from 1670 in Jonathan Gill's book, Harlem, The 400 Year History. from Dutch village to capital of black America. And he included a modern street grid sort of superimposed on top of this old map.
And so you can see that this tiny village of new Harlem ran from the Harlem river around today's first Avenue around 125th. It ran southwest, okay, down to just west of today's 3rd Avenue around 117th Street, if you can imagine that, with farms stretching out from it. But this was small. It was a very small place.
And this was like a full 
Speaker 3: 150 years before they would even consider a street grid up here. That's right. So you could just lay out. The village, you know, pal, mal, however you pleased here, no 
Speaker 5: [00:08:00] roads, right? And they did, I mean, they were usually, you know, basing the orientation of villages like this on natural conditions, you know, like the hills and the streams and so on that were already there.
But I just want to underscore that New Harlem is a very small place, just a village that was surrounded by farms and fields. But all of upper Manhattan would also be home. by the late 1700s to some really fine estates, you know, like the Morris Jumel Mansion, which was constructed in 1766, about three miles northwest of this village of New Harlem.
Speaker 3: And a mansion that was home to General George Washington, actually, during the American Revolution. 
Speaker 4: Mm 
Speaker 3: hmm. And there would be You know, many other fine estates sort of scattered around, including one, I think, owned by Alexander Hamilton, 
Speaker 5: Hamilton Grange. Yes, that's right. And Minnie's Land, the estate of John James Audubon, which [00:09:00] was built in the 1840s.
But these were all located, yes, in upper Manhattan, but quite a ways northwest of this village. You're just 
Speaker 3: painting the background of the canvas here. We're seeing a whole scene here. But like by the mid 19th century, let's pull a little closer. But closer to our story here, but the mid 19th century, several miles south of this area, way down south, the tip of Manhattan, New York city's population was booming.
It hit more than half a million people. by the year 1850. Yeah. So that growth is happening down there. When did Harlem start to 
Speaker 5: grow? Well, the whole area in upper Manhattan started really developing in the late 1830s. You mentioned the street grid. They would be surveyed and marked off by the commissioner's plan of 1811, of course, but they wouldn't actually be laid out for decades, right?
They would just remain fields for, for many decades. And probably the biggest [00:10:00] reason that so few people actually lived way up here was, you know, it was just so hard to get to. Mm hmm. But that changed in 1837, when a horse drawn railway, the New York and Harlem, opened along 4th Avenue. And now, suddenly, it was possible to live up here, and to get down to the city when you needed to, or if you worked down there.
I mean, on good days, you know, you could get down there in a railway car that was moving at up to 20 miles an hour. By 4th Avenue, you mean today's Park Avenue. That's right, yeah. And that A horse drawn railway would be joined in the 1850s by horse cars that were going up and down 3rd Avenue so that, as Mike Wallace and Edwin Burroughs point out in their book Gotham, by the 1860s, 3rd and 4th Avenues were quote, lined with detached frame buildings, shops, and occasional groups of row houses.
Horse cars ran along 2nd [00:11:00] Avenue too, all the way up to 122nd, which provided access to Harlem's modest cottages. By Boss Tweed's time, with newcomers spilling westward along 125th Street, Harlem seemed ripe for full scale development. Oh, just a little 
Speaker 3: name dropping there, Boss Tweed. A reminder that Boss Tweed and Tammany Hall were cashing in on all of this development and urbanization in a big way by the, the years around the Civil War and afterwards into the 
Speaker 5: 1870s.
Yeah, they were cashing in, they were profiteering, they were getting kickbacks, but I would argue that they were also overseeing. scene, block after block of the street grid becoming a reality all over the city. And this included, by the late 1860s and into the 1870s, these blocks up here in Harlem. Banks corrupt politicians for [00:12:00] quickly building a bunch of houses up here, a bunch of tenements.
Yes, many of these Tammany affiliated officials would become filthy rich off of all of this urban development. And many, it should be pointed out, would also. Eventually be imprisoned and by the way as the neighborhood would, you know, rather quickly develop over the next couple of decades this rail line along 4th Avenue Created a bit of a division because east of the railway in East Harlem this area became filled with cheaper apartment blocks that would become home to mostly poor, recently arrived immigrants.
While posher, you know, homes and brownstones and even mansions would occupy many of the blocks that were west of here in central Harlem. And it certainly wasn't 
Speaker 3: just housing going up, but of course there were lots of factories. This area became very 
Speaker 5: industrialized. Yeah, all kinds of factories and piers, you know, [00:13:00] stuck out into the rivers that were surrounding it.
You had the Hudson, the Harlem, and the East Rivers. Jonathan Gill writes that following the Civil War, Uptown Manhattan experienced, quote, an economic boom boosted by inexpensive immigrant labor, turning Harlem's shoreline into ever denser industrial zones. The bank of the Harlem River sprouted stockyards.
tar dumps, garbage transfer stations, gas works, rubber factories, masonry and lumber yards, flour mills, ice houses, ironworks, plumbing supply houses, and elevator and dumbwaiter manufacturers. This sounds like quite 
Speaker 3: an industrial zone, actually. Pretty heavily. Yeah. Kind of disgusting. I can only imagine what they were pumping into the water here.
Well, and 
Speaker 5: let's not even talk about how people swam in that water. Or fished and ate those fish out of that [00:14:00] water. But obviously all of that industry attracted labor. In 1872, the New York Times estimated that 50, 000 people were living in Upper Manhattan. And they reported the next year that this area boasted 400 buildings under construction.
So throughout all 
Speaker 3: of upper Manhattan in this period, farmland and fine estates and even that old village of Harlem, all of it was being Urbanized right before their very eyes. And so then in East Harlem, the subject of our story, East of Fifth Avenue, who then was moving here during this industrialization period?
Speaker 5: Well, for the most part in the mid 19th century, it was Irish and German immigrants who were moving up to find work and to, you know, get out of the downtown slums. Consider these stats, Greg. During the 1840s and 1850s, more than 3 million immigrants arrived in New York, which is [00:15:00] an annual average of 157, 000 people.
That number averaged for 20 years. 40 percent of them We're Irish. Well, 32 percent were German, and many of the Germans were Jewish. They didn't 
Speaker 3: all stay in New York, of course. You know, they moved on to our, the growing country. But many did, and in many cases, they found cheap often very cramped places to live 
Speaker 5: downtown.
Yeah, but already by the 1850s, some Irish immigrants were actually moving up to East Harlem and constructing simple wooden homes around 125th Street. But when do Italians arrive? Let's narrow our story down a little bit. Well, in the 1850 census, there were only 833 Italians listed as living in New York City.
Okay, but that number would increase really quickly. [00:16:00] 30 years later in 1880, there would be 20, 000. And I don't want to get ahead of our story here, but 20 years after that, in 1900, there would be about 250, 000 Italians living in New York. So, in a matter of 50 years, New York goes from having 833 Italians to 250, 000.
That is 
Speaker 3: massive increase just in a few decades, like what we might call the gilded age, right? I mean, during that period, right? But why were they coming to New York? 
Speaker 5: Well, because of huge political and economic instability that was happening back in Italy. Now, Italy as a unified country was new. For centuries, battles had been fought over the land that we now call Italy.
And by the early 19th century, After Napoleon's army was defeated there, the Italian peninsula was [00:17:00] mostly made up of independent governments. But many were dreaming of unification. You know, there were revolutionaries who wanted to reunite these governments into one republic. And this would lead to many, many conflicts, and insurrections, and revolutions, led by figures.
Such as Giuseppe Garibaldi, 
Speaker 3: who, 
Speaker 5: by 
Speaker 3: the way, would actually come to live in New York for a little bit. In fact, you can find him out down in Washington Square Park if you want to say hi. There's a statue. There's a statue there. So he, he had a presence. He'd be a great Subject for a show in the future, sorry, sorry, but go on 
Speaker 5: there would be multiple wars of independence The French were involved, you know helping Garibaldi and his troops battle Austria and control it goes on and on they succeeded in driving Austria out in 1861 when this new kingdom of Italy was formed Which then grew in the 1860s to include Venice [00:18:00] and then finally in 1870 to include Rome, which became its capital.
So all of that 
Speaker 3: was happening in Italy while Bas Tweed Was over here pocketing kickbacks on building the streets up here in East Harlem. This is concurrent history. Okay, so Then were these immigrating Italians 
Speaker 5: fleeing the war? I think that it's safe to say that most were fleeing the economic results of that, you know, of the unification of Italy.
Simply put this, this new country or this kingdom unified into one country, all of these regions that were very, very different. You know, northern Italy was financially far more advanced and developed and industrialized than southern Italy, where residents were still farming in many ways like their ancestors had hundreds of years before.
And by 
Speaker 3: southern Italy, let's even be more [00:19:00] specific. You mean everything south of Rome. So that is like what Naples, Sicily. Yeah. Look at the boot, the boot, look at a map. Yeah. All of 
Speaker 5: these areas south of Rome. And the economies down in these southern Italian regions had been very, very pre industrial. The farming techniques had been very old fashioned.
The trade was very local, hyper local. So when Italy unified, say, you know, with Rome becoming capital in 1870, This economy in this new country was suddenly opened up and deregulated, which caused the southern economy to collapse. They simply could not compete with the north. And so, 
Speaker 3: many came to America, and to New York in specific.
Were they looking to start over? 
Speaker 5: Actually, most came here looking to make money and then returned to their families back in Italy. [00:20:00] So, back in the 1850s, that small number of Italians that I mentioned in New York, that 833 of them, mostly came from northern Italy. But by 1880, the situation had flipped.
Nearly all of them were coming from the south. When, according to Mike Wallace and Edwin Burroughs, quote, Southern Italian cultivators and laborers and a smaller number of artisans began making their way to the United States. Overwhelmingly, between 75 and 90 percent, depending on the year, they were single men between the ages of 14 and 44.
Those single women also came, intent perhaps on earning a dowry and improving their prospects of finding a good husband when they returned. Overwhelmingly, they were poor. 
Speaker 3: So, mostly young men, mostly poor, and mostly from the South. And most, we should [00:21:00] add, weren't coming here, like, with the intention to stay.
They, they intended to go back to Italy once they had saved enough money. 
Speaker 5: And many did return. In fact, of those Italians who came over in the years leading up to 1900, more than 40 percent of them actually returned to Italy. But that means that 60 percent stayed. Either taking jobs around the, you know, all over the country or staying right here in the city where many of them took on backbreaking jobs as day laborers, you know, digging ditches, laying sewers.
Building the city that we know today, the infrastructure. Yes, and sometimes also being used to break up strikes. As they were being employed as day laborers, many were just focused on getting paid. And one of the strikes that used Italian labor was during the construction of the First Avenue Trolley Line [00:22:00] in Upper Manhattan in the 1870s.
These Italian workers moved uptown and into very primitive lodgings that sprung up around the East River and 106th Street. And a few years later, in 1878, immigrants from the town of Pola, located near Salerno in southern Italy, moved up to East 115th Street. 
Speaker 3: And so the Italians had arrived to East Harlem.
We'll watch the community thrive after this.
Speaker 6: Ladies and gentlemen, welcome aboard this Air France message. With Air France, your journey to France begins when you set foot on the plane, starting with a complimentary glass of champagne in every class. And in Business and La Première, savor a five course meal with cheese and wine and unique menus created by some of the greatest French chefs.
Enjoy a taste of France before you arrive. Bon appétit! [00:23:00] Elegance is a journey. Air France. 
Speaker 3: This episode is brought to you by Factor. It's a new year. Well, okay, so we're a few weeks into the new year, but it's not too late to optimize your nutrition while enjoying a great dinner every night. Factor has chef made gourmet meals that makes eating well easy.
With 40 options across 8 dietary preferences on the menu. Each week, it's easy to pick meals tailored to your goals. Factor came at just the right time for me a couple weeks ago when I had a lot of life distractions and deadlines preventing me from eating anything remotely good. So thank you, Factor, for bringing me Chicken Florentine, Honey Mustard Pork Chops, Fiesta Salmon.
You can eat well and change it up every single evening. So eat smart with Factor. Get started at factormeals. com slash Bowery50off and [00:24:00] use code B O W E R Y 5 0 O F F. To get 50 percent off your first box plus free shipping. That's code Bowery 50 off B O W E R Y 5 0 O F F at factor meals. com slash Bowery 50 off to get 50 percent off plus free 
Speaker 2: shipping on your first box.
And now, a Next Level moment from AT& T Business. Say you've sent out a gigantic shipment of pillows, and they need to be there in time for International Sleep Day. You've got AT& T 5G, so you're fully confident. But, the vendor isn't responding, and International Sleep Day is tomorrow. Luckily, AT& T 5G lets you deal with any issues with ease, so the pillows will get delivered and everyone can sleep soundly.
Especially you. AT& T 5g requires a compatible plan and device coverage, not available everywhere. Learn more at att. com slash 5g network. 
Speaker 3: Now, Tom, the first reference that I could ever find in a newspaper mentioning a [00:25:00] place in New York called little Italy. Okay. Like a scoured the papers in the 18 seventies and eighties.
First reference I found was in the Brooklyn daily times. May 25th, 1882. And it was referring not to the Italian immigrants of Mulberry street in five points downtown, but rather the Italians who had settled here on the Upper East side and already. Already in the story, we see that there are some major issues going on with this particular article.
A couple sentences from this disturbing article, quote, The stenches and ill drainage of that part of Harlem known as Little Italy have been complained of to the New York Health Board. Many deaths of diphtheria and fever have recently occurred here. Unquote. 
Speaker 5: Wow. That is not what I would call good press for this new neighborhood.
Quote, Little [00:26:00] Italy. Yeah. Little Italy. Yeah. Quote. But also I suppose not really surprising given all the industry that we were just talking about. It was foul up here already. So not a surprising quote. We should add right now that actually most of the things that were written about in the New York newspapers of the day Were really I think strikingly negative.
Yeah in tone, right? They're often highlighting You know either the squalor of living conditions or the crime And those things certainly did exist and we'll talk about them in a moment here but Yeah, it was a neighborhood of tenements, but you also can't really trust the contemporary press of the day, you know, to have painted an even handed picture.
No. So then what do we know, you know, about real life, you know, that was happening up here in Italian Harlem? Well, to start 
Speaker 3: off, if you head up to this neighborhood, it's, I must say that it's hard to [00:27:00] visualize the many, many, many, many blocks of tenements that once stood here in the East 90s and East 100s, all the way up to East 125th Street housing, which you mentioned had been built, you know, a couple decades before.
It's hard to visualize because today, most of those tenements have been replaced by public housing. In fact, according to the New York Health Foundation, today, East Harlem contains the second highest concentration of public housing in the entire country. 
Speaker 5: Wow, so the neighborhood today looks almost nothing like it did.
In the 1880s, and if most of it was demolished, I guess that says something about the quality of the housing stock that had been constructed in the 19th century, but the tenement apartment blocks, you know, that were built up here by developers in the late 19th century, [00:28:00] those tenements were not really that much different than other tenements that would be found in You know, other tenement districts around the city, like the Lower East Side down in five points and Hell's Kitchen, you know, I mean, visit the tenement 
Speaker 3: museum for more information, I guess on this, right.
By the decade of the 1890s, the city began clearing away some of the worst housing downtown in and around five points and on all of those tenement quarters. But then as a result, the Italian immigrants that had lived there. In those areas, then moved to other Italian quarters, but mainly to Italian Harlem.
So this is one of the reasons that it suddenly has a growth spurt sort of at the end of the 19th century. And of course it, it wasn't just Italians making that move by the 1880s, the entirety of Harlem had a large Eastern European Jewish population, as well as at this time, a small number of African Americans.[00:29:00] 
And just to the south of Italian Harlem, let's just note, the Germans by the end of the century had already created a thriving community of their own, where they could express their own customs and traditions from back 
Speaker 5: home. This is a place called Yorkville, which we did an entire show on a few years ago.
That's episode 332. Of course, Civic reformers and city leaders were hoping, you know, from for an exodus from, you know, the city's most crowded neighborhoods and making this move even easier right north up to East Harlem was the construction of two elevated train lines along the east side along 2nd and 3rd avenues, which were up and running right around the time that these large waves of Italians began arriving in New York.
Right. So with 
Speaker 3: all of that said, as the context, let's get a profile of the residents here. Like, let's look [00:30:00] closer, courtesy of a classic book written by Robert Anthony Orsi called The Madonna of 115th Street. Quote, men significantly outnumbered women in the first decades of Italian Harlem. They could live with family members who had already established themselves, or they could board with friends and paisani, fellow countrymen, other people from their village.
or district. Many set up family like households with other male immigrants in rooming houses. Sociability in Italy was family based, and these first male immigrants seemed to have wanted to recreate familiar family structures in the new world. Unquote. 
Speaker 5: And while it would get very crowded, In East Harlem, conditions were not initially as bad as they had been down on Mulberry Street, downtown, in that little 
Speaker 4: Italy.
Speaker 5: And often residents lived near others from their [00:31:00] same city or region back in Italy. So you'd have a block of Genovese Italians, you know, next to Neapolitans, next to immigrants from Calabria, you know. It was like a map of Italy. Being sort of recreated and stitched together on the streets of East Harlem.
Speaker 3: Yeah, you could do a little tour block by block of different areas over in Italy. 
Speaker 5: If only we had had Bowery Boys Walks. 
Speaker 3: com back in the day. We could have hired some of those people to take us on a tour. But this is a fact that's important to point out because we sometimes forget when talking about the immigrant experience, you know, sailing into New York Harbor past the Statue of Liberty and into the Castle Garden.
immigrant processing station down in Battery Park, many of these people did not consider themselves to be from this new kingdom of Italy, you know, as you described, but rather from dozens of little places like cities, sometimes even small [00:32:00] villages. 
Speaker 5: Yeah. And often they had very little in common with other.
People from other areas of the country, you know, Sicilian, for example, probably had little in common with a northerner and 
Speaker 3: Mentioning Sicilian it would actually be those from Sicily from the southernmost point of Italy They would come to dominate the life and culture of Italian Harlem Now I wanna focus on one of the few surviving landmarks in the neighborhood.
A place that you can actually visit, see with your own eyes. This is the Church of our Lady of Mount Carmel, which it's actually has two entrances on East 115th and then 116th, but it's frequently mentioned as being on 115th if there is a focal point. To Italian Harlem, it would be this church and the surrounding streets.
Now its story begins in 1881. 
Speaker 5: So right [00:33:00] after the elevated train started operating in the neighborhood, bringing in, helping to bring in these new Italian residents, and also just a year before that news clipping that you just read that was so condescending in tone, which actually first used the phrase, Little 
Speaker 3: Italy.
Right. So all of this is happening sort of at the, the same, in the same period. Now, you know, in many immigrant communities, the first arrivals often will set up a mutual aid society to facilitate newcomers, the people who come afterwards, help them with all their basic needs, including in this case, helping them out with their religious needs.
Almost all of the Italians coming over were, of course. Catholics. 
Speaker 5: Mm 
Speaker 3: hmm. 
Speaker 5: I know. I did see the movie Conclave.
Just kidding. Yeah. No. You and I visited Rome a few years ago, and we, we did spend a few [00:34:00] hours in the Vatican together. Oh my gosh. Yeah. 
Speaker 3: Road trip to the Vatican. That should be our next mini series, going from the Netherlands to the Vatican. There are actually a lot of New York connections, 
Speaker 4: but 
Speaker 3: seriously, seriously, there were There were thousands and thousands of Catholics in New York already by this time, mostly though, with Irish and German backgrounds, and many, many of those worshipping in very, very grand, august, gilded age churches and cathedrals, like St.
Patrick's Cathedral on Fifth Avenue, but in Italy, there were a myriad of regional differences in how So, the Catholic faith was practiced. One might describe them, say, like rustic, imbued with folk traditions, refit, reorganized for 
Speaker 5: village life. And religious services were often laden [00:35:00] with symbols and, or saints that were tied into local customs.
Right. 
Speaker 3: Well, so. In 1881, some immigrants from Southwest Italy, the town of Pola, which you already mentioned, that's right. They just moved uptown. So these are sort of the, some of the first residents of this area, they began an aid society for police immigrants. And then the following year in 1882, they organized a Festa or a religious festival in honor.
of the Madonna, the patroness of their community back in Pola. By 1884, these celebrations just a couple of years old, we're already bringing thousands of Southern Italians to the streets of Harlem. You know, most of them coming up from, from downtown, from five points. By that time, they also had a statue of the Madonna, which was hoisted.
And carried to the streets in celebration. In that year, 1884, they also built her [00:36:00] a home here on 115th street, the church of the lady of Mount Carmel. Quoting again from Orsi's book, quote, so committed were the immigrants to this project that many of them came home after terrible and exhausting days of work and with their own hands, dug the foundations of the new church and laid its bricks.
When organizers. From the mason's union, objected to the free work being done by Italian men, Italian women from the neighborhood tied back their hair and took over the job. And 
Speaker 5: so this tradition finally had a home. And the Italians here had their first church in East Harlem. Yes. 
Speaker 3: However, because East Harlem was still home to just as many Irish and Germans, right?
I mean, this is early in the transition. Believe it or not, the Italians and their statue of Madonna were actually [00:37:00] relegated to the basement of the church, right? I mean, like they had helped build it, but then they had to move into the basement all the way until the year 1919. And so. This fact, which is startling to me, actually, it underscores the ethnic and religious disparities that are at play here, okay?
There's the mainstream, if you want to describe them that way, the mainstream Non Italian Catholics, or even Northern Italian Catholics are probably in this group as well, did not consider the Southern Italians to be quote, good Catholics. Italians were often ignored their folk traditions, right? They're, they're worshiping in a different way.
And they were seen by these other established Catholics as seeming anti Christian, sacrilegious, and even. Pagan at times throughout the years, there were even attempts to ban [00:38:00] this festival of the Madonna. It managed to persevere and as I'll mention 
Speaker 5: later, it continues to this day, but this all underscores, you know, the wide range of challenges that Italians were having at this time and the general.
anti Catholic sentiment that existed in New York City. Mm hmm. Now, I just 
Speaker 3: want to add one kind of final nuance to these immigration patterns, because by the 1890s, so now, you know, we have Italians in East Harlem for a little over a decade or whatever. By the 1890s, a new surge of Southern Italian immigration.
It's occurring and it looked different from even that original surge from the 1870s, which was primarily men, as you mentioned, who were coming to send money back home by the 1890s. Now, near the end of the century, New York was now actually seeing whole families. coming over from southern [00:39:00] Italy, and they actually came with the intention of making America their 
Speaker 5: home.
And beginning in 1892, to handle these massive waves of immigrants from all over Europe, there was a new immigrant processing center that had opened on Ellis Island. And just a few 
Speaker 3: years later, in 1898, immigrants who came in through Ellis Island were categorized by race to quote from author Maria Lorino in her book, The Italian Americans, quote, for Italians, this meant that the immigration official marked down whether they were from the north or the south, Alpine or Mediterranean, stamping their arrival with the distinction of superiority or inferiority.
High Italian from the cradle of civilization or, quote, [00:40:00] low Italian from the cauldron of criminality, unquote. 
Speaker 5: Adding to this prejudice, southern Italians sometimes tended to have darker skin tones and, you know, curly, dark hair, which created another barrier in a city where people were constantly subjected to discrimination based upon their appearance.
And many of these men who 
Speaker 3: came over would be employed building the great New York infrastructure of the age, bridges, skyscrapers, and of course, the New York subway system. And then as this population began shifting from lower Manhattan into upper Manhattan by the new century, in fact, using that very subway to move, which many of them helped build, they, by that time, by the time they came up here, they were being met.
With even greater [00:41:00] deteriorating housing conditions to quote again, from Orsi's book, Italian Harlem was never a physically attractive place to live. The streets were crowded, filthy, and dangerous refuse tar was dumped into the East river at 116th street. Garbage was unloaded at 97th and 98th streets. The gas works on the river burned and belts flames and fumes all day and night.
There were even stockyards on 99th Street and 3rd Avenue at the end of the 19th century, unquote. 
Speaker 5: Hold on a second. The gas tanks that you just mentioned, these were massive tanks holding natural gas, and they were the tallest buildings in the neighborhood. There is a beautiful painting called Festival by Daniel R.
Calentano that you really have to put up on the website. He grew up in the early 20th century in East Harlem and in 1934 he painted this [00:42:00] extraordinary street scene of the Mount Carmel Festival. But in the background you see these two very large gas tanks. 
Speaker 3: Yeah, it's noxious. It's hanging over the whole scene here.
You know, like I can imagine people thinking, why would you leave the beauties of Italia to come here? Right. And yet a very supportive, very rich community thrived here pushing back against crime and delinquency and all the other unpleasantries that we've mentioned to create a street light that many later generations would reflect back upon very fondly.
Even the haughty New York Sun, which mostly focused on only the bad parts in their coverage, couldn't help but on occasion notice the street life. In 1891, a reporter wrote, The neighbors called the district a Little Italy. They have made it a city unto themselves. They have their own church, their own hospital, their own [00:43:00] Italian undertaker and several Italian bankers.
Small groceries abound with queer Italian delicacies displayed in the windows. Shoe shops can be found all over the district. And fruit stands for the sale of Italian luxuries, which few, if any Harlemites, have ever had the temerity to test, can be found on every street corner. The district also supports a few jewelry stores and an abundance of saloons.
Unquote.
Speaker 5: Well, Greg, that sounds quite lovely. You had mentioned, you know, that the press was often quite negative in their portrayals of Little Italy here. 
Speaker 3: Yeah, I mean, if I continue to read the article, I mean, I actually can't read some of it because it's just like, it's, it's blatantly gross, but they continue to describe the neighborhood with such sentences as there is a layer of dirt over everything, not accepting the majority of the [00:44:00] inhabitants.
Little Italy is preeminently the home of the rag gatherers and the general toilers. So those are part of that. And I can't imagine that those statements are actually true. So to give a more even handed, maybe even romantic view of these streets, I want to turn one final time to Orsi's book, because it's, he writes in such an eloquent way about this neighborhood quote, Italian Harlem was a theater of extremes.
It was a poor, densely populated, and physically deteriorating place troubled by crime and juvenile delinquents. But it was also a place that people came to love. A place where, against the odds, Italian immigrants and their children created a community life. It was a world of distances. The distance between Harlem and Southern Italy.
Between Harlem and the rest of New York City, between the values and perceptions of the old world and those of the new, between [00:45:00] generations, between hopes and realities. It was a beloved place that people struggled hard to leave, and then returned to, whenever they could, to visit. I
Speaker 5: don't want to throw a damper on that beautiful quote, but we're not quite done with the bad stuff yet. However, that does help me really picture the neighborhood scene. You know, I can see the bakeries and the push carts maybe some bocce ball in the streets and restaurants and saloons were mentioned.
Yeah, a saloon 
Speaker 3: like the one at 114th street and Pleasant Avenue. Now Pleasant Avenue is this very small Avenue. That's almost at the end of the water and it only goes a few blocks today, but that's also part of the neighborhood here and on Pleasant Avenue at the foot of it was a saloon owned by one Charles Rayo.
It's a tiny little place that [00:46:00] became a popular neighborhood destination. And he named the place of course, after himself. And then his children would continue the business into the 20th century, turning the saloon into a restaurant, which, believe it or not, is still there today. 
Speaker 5: Well, not only is it there, but I mean, there's some of it in your cupboard as well, Greg.
There is! There is! Over there! They are famous for their pasta sauces, which are Now available at a supermarket near you. 
Speaker 3: A little free ad for them. But they're also famous, actually, for being the most difficult place in the city to get a dinner reservation. It's so small, and because it's so iconic and old, that you have to actually know somebody to get A table.
Mm hmm. I'm just putting that out in the universe. My stomach's growling. In other words, don't look on resi. com or whatever reservation site to get a [00:47:00] table because you're not going to get it. Yes. No, right. 
Speaker 5: But it is. It's located right around the corner from Mount Carmel. You know, the church. So it's these two icons of 19th century Italian Harlem right next to each other.
Yeah, like flip side. 
Speaker 3: There's another big vestige of the past just across the street from Rios. Now, if you couldn't tell from any of my descriptions, there's not a lot of parkland around here, right? For the people. Plenty of water. But that all changed on October 7th, 1905, with the opening of Thomas Jefferson Park.
Curious name, given that Jefferson has no connection whatsoever with this location. 
Speaker 5: Well, I mean, he did name his plantation back in Virginia, Monticello, which means little mountain in Italian. Oh, 
Speaker 3: yeah. Okay. Yeah. I mean, I guess they could have named it after Columbus, like, like a lot of other things back then.
Well, I guess there was already a Columbus park. It was taken. [00:48:00] Yeah. Yeah. Well, anyway, according to the New York Evening World quote, the new park, which is situated in the heart of the Harlem Italian quarter has the finest athletic field of any municipal park in the United States. That's a claim. In greeting the American flag on Saturday's dedication, the little Italian children of the neighborhood repeat this salutation.
Quote, I pledge allegiance to my flag and to the country for which it stands, one union, indivisible, with liberty and justice for all. 
Speaker 5: Ah, yes, that. Variation of the Pledge of Allegiance. We heard all about it thanks to an old podcast of yours. Yeah, huh. But not everything here in Italian Harlem was food and fun in the early 20th century.
We'll get to the rest of the story. Welcome,
Speaker 7: friends, to the Playful Scratch from the California Lottery. We've got a special guest today, the Scratcher's [00:49:00] Scratch Master himself, Juan. Juan, you've mastered 713 playful ways to scratch. Impressive. How'd you do it? Well, I began with a coin, then tried a guitar pick. I even used a cactus once. Ha ha! Can scratch with anything.
Even this mic right here. See? See. Well there you have it. Scratchers are fun. No matter how you scratch and scratchers from the California lottery, a little play can make your day Police play responsibly. Must be 18 years or older to purchase, play, or claim. 
Speaker 5: So by the beginning of the 20th century, there were far more Italians living in Harlem.
then down around Mulberry Street. Author Jonathan Gill writes that by the turn of the century, quote, Harlem's Little Italy boasted an Italian population that was not only three times as large as that of the East Side, but larger than Sicily as well. Block after block of East Harlem from East 110th to To East 130th Street, east of [00:50:00] 3rd Avenue, was, quote, as thoroughly Italian as Rome, Naples, Palermo, or Messina, according to one contemporary account.
By 1910, when there were only about 10, 000 Italians downtown, some 59, 000 Italians called East Harlem home, and another 13, 000 or so had settled in other parts of Harlem. Numbers that would double within a decade.
Speaker 3: So nearly 60, 000 Italians by 1910 and then double that amount by 1920. By the way, I like the detail there that there were thousands more living in other parts of Harlem. Let's not, yeah, let's not forget that. It's not an either or here. 
Speaker 5: I, yeah, exactly. I think it's worth remembering that history is messy and not clear cut, right?
Just because this section of East Harlem might have been called. Little Italy [00:51:00] doesn't mean that Italians weren't living in central and West Harlem. And also, as you mentioned earlier, there was a huge Jewish population who was also living at the same time, you know, in East Harlem, along with Irish. Right, 
Speaker 3: but the largest population of Italian immigrants did choose, you know, into the 20th century here to settle here, often near their old world neighbors.
Everything had been established already. 
Speaker 5: Yes. As Gil points out that the streets in lower East Harlem, East 104th to 106 were home to Northern Italians while Southern Italians settled into those same blocks and all of the blocks North of here. And you painted a picture before of rather, you know, unsanitary neighborhood although colorful.
And it was also rather dangerous as residents who had eventually very little to lose turned to crime. By 1900, [00:52:00] Italian Harlem had the highest homicide rate in the city. And the 
Speaker 3: crimes that were plaguing the neighborhood, we're not talking. Like pickpockets or stealing apples from these push carts. We're talking about the birth of organized crime that was extending its tentacles into, you know, controlling gambling, prostitution, 
Speaker 5: drugs.
Yeah. And, you know, these things thrived here because the police, naturally, were also in on the racket. 
Speaker 4: Mm hmm. 
Speaker 5: They took payoffs and looked the other way. And there were many different groups of criminals and gangs who often fought each other. One boss was the Naples born Pasquarello Spinelli, who was a woman, by the way, who trained children in how to become dangerous criminals in an old horse stable on East 107th Street.
But then, on [00:53:00] March 20th, 1912, Mrs. Spinelli's enemies, who were jealous, perhaps, of her criminal hold on the neighborhood, took action. The New York Times reported, Well, Nicolina Lenare, the 20 year old daughter A Mrs. Pasquarello Spinelli, known as the wealthiest woman in Little Italy, was sitting at the front window of her mother's apartment, 335 East 108th Street, at 5.
30 o'clock yesterday afternoon, she heard the reports of a dozen revolver shots from just across the street. There, at 3. 34, is a livery stable, which Mrs. Spinelli owns jointly with Luigi Gazzaro. And with her, Mrs. Spinelli had gone when she left the apartment a few minutes before. As the girl looked, two men rushed from the stable.
Each held a revolver. The street was filled with [00:54:00] excited Italians. But at the sight of the weapons, the throng opened a lane through which the men fled to Second Avenue, disappearing around the corner to the south. Inside the stables lay Mrs. Spinelli. There was a bullet wound in her right temple, and another in the left side of her neck.
So was it the work of other jealous criminal gangs? Or as the article points out later, was this murder related to the fact that Spinelli's daughter, Nicolina Lenare, who had been watching from her window, had also killed ex sweethearts, a man named Francisco Monaco, just five months earlier, by stabbing him in the back twenty two times.
Speaker 3: Wow, I wasn't expecting this to get so vivid. [00:55:00] 
Speaker 5: But I should also mention that I also read, Greg, that Nicolina had stabbed her ex lover because he was trying to rob the family safe. But regardless, the, the likely murderer of Pasquarella was probably a criminal named Anelio Prisco, who led his own gang of thieves and thugs, including a gang that had included this Monaco, the ex boyfriend who was then stabbed 22 times.
Yes, yes, 
Speaker 4: yes. 
Speaker 5: We got that. This, this story just gets grimmer and grimmer because then Prisco, the murderer, was himself then fatally shot nine months later in December of 1912 by somebody who was working for the neighborhood's most powerful crime boss, a man named Giosu Gallucci, who was known as the mayor of Little Italy.
Apparently, Prisco had, had taken out [00:56:00] Gallucci's brother. In 1909, so there's some payback. 
Speaker 3: Did Martin Scorsese write this? I think he knows this story. He probably does, I bet. Very complicated. Who was this Gallucci? 
Speaker 5: Gallucci, the mayor of Little Italy had been born in Naples. He immigrated to New York in 1892, and he eventually based his operations out of a three story house and bakery that was located at 318 West 109th Street.
And through the criminal ring that he ran, he extorted and murdered, and robbed, and controlled entire industries, like the neighborhood's coal and ice business, and gambling. He even controlled the price of olive oil. How could he get away with all this? Was he paying off the cops? Well, probably, but he actually, he did something even more strategic.
[00:57:00] He delivered voters from the area to the polls on election day to vote for Tammany politicians. Well, that'll certainly keep the heat off of you, I imagine. Yeah, it managed to keep the police away, although he did have a lot of enemies, and on May 17th, 1915, Gallucci himself was shot while he was sitting with his son in a cafe on East 109th Street.
and they would both die from that attack. 
Speaker 3: Okay. All right. So I think we get the picture. The neighborhood was providing a home and a community to tens of thousands of arriving Italian families. Living conditions were challenging. Churches and schools were providing some, some stability, but there was this active criminal underworld and we can't.
We can't skip past it, 
Speaker 5: right? And to rewind a second, Galucci, who was shot in the cafe, was part of the larger [00:58:00] story of the mafia in the neighborhood. His gang was allied with the neighborhood's Morello mafia family, and his murder was actually caused by Morello's gang's feud with another crime family in Brooklyn.
Now, I know this gets confusing, but let's just back up for one second to the turn of the century, when a sort of criminal society had emerged here called the Black Hand, which was made up of multiple gangs of criminals who extorted money from local businesses. Up here and also down in the other Little Italy and other places and ran gambling rackets.
Well, one of the gangs that dominated East Harlem in the early 1900s was called the 107th Street Mob. And it was run by a Sicilian immigrant named Giuseppe Morello and his half brothers. They joined criminal [00:59:00] forces with the gang that was ruling downtown's Little Italy, and together, they all battled it out with the Brooklyn based mob.
which was run by a man named Pellegrino Murano from Naples. And it was Murano's gang, here in Brooklyn, that was responsible for ordering the killing of Gallucci in the cafe, because they wanted in on his rackets. But eventually, these Manhattan and Brooklyn Mafia factions would also link up and enter the 1920s, just in time for prohibition, which was of course very lucrative and dangerous.
At which time East Harlem's mob scene would be run by Giuseppe Morello's, half brother, who was named Cyro Terranova, who in the 1930s would be forced into retirement by the big bosses in the Luciano Crime family.
All of this, Greg, just [01:00:00] underscores obviously that East Harlem was very important to the history of the American Mafia. In fact, this 107th Street gang eventually developed into the Genovese crime family. But, we should add, organized crime was happening all over the city, and in fact, Jewish gangsters were all over Central Harlem.
But here in East Harlem, it was Italian. And by the way, the 1920s also saw a large movement of Jewish New Yorkers out of Harlem. The Jewish population in all of Harlem fell from 200, 000 during the 1920s down to only 5, 000. by the end of the decade, and then virtually nothing by the time of the Great Depression.
But the Italians stayed, and in fact, they grew in population during the 1920s, taking over blocks in East Harlem up to 125th Street and [01:01:00] down to 96th Street. But still staying mostly over here on the far east side of Harlem. Yes, a district, by the way, that would be represented in Congress, beginning in 1916, by a New Yorker with a strong Italian connection.
Talking, of course, about Fiorello LaGuardia. One of the greatest 
Speaker 3: mayors that New York has ever had. That's editorializing, but I'll stand by it. And LaGuardia was born in Greenwich Village in 1882. 
Speaker 5: That's right. And then he was actually raised all over the place, including in Italy for a while before returning to New York City where he studied law at NYU.
And then became a rising political star for the Republican Party, and he represented East Harlem from 1917 until 1919, and then again from 1922 [01:02:00] until 1933, when he ran for mayor. More on that in a bit. But pulling back for just a second, I think it's also worth noting, Greg, that west of Fifth Avenue, meanwhile, during the teens and the 1920s, something else extraordinary was happening.
Speaker 3: Yeah. Central Harlem, of course, was transforming into the largest black community in the whole country. 
Speaker 5: Yes, and we are going to hop over Fifth Avenue in our next show, but for now, we're going to stay here in East Harlem, which, by the way, was also home to Black New Yorkers, many of them increasingly from the West Indies and Spanish speaking Caribbean.
And after World 
Speaker 3: War I and into the 1920s, parts of East Harlem were already being referred to as Hispanic Harlem. 
Speaker 5: Yeah. By the mid 1920s, about 40, [01:03:00] 000 Spanish speakers were living in East Harlem. Nearly 90 percent of them had come from Puerto Rico. But still by the end of the 1920s, East Harlem was now home to more than 100, 000 Italians.
Speaker 3: Now, Tom, I would like to take us to the year 1933. It was a very momentous year here in Italian Harlem, in big ways and in small ways. I'll just give you a snapshot of the neighborhood here from the New York Times, July 17th, 1933. Quote, Mount Carmel Fiesta draws huge throng, a steady stream of pilgrims, Italians, and Italian Americans from the five boroughs and scattered parts of the country, many carrying huge candles and enormous bouquets of roses, Poured into the Graystone Church on 115th Street last night.
This is the [01:04:00] greatest Fiesta of the year and the calendar of East Harlem, Italians, and fathers estimate that more than 100,000 people will have attended the services and accompanying street festival before it closes tonight. Booths line the electrically decorated streets from which are sold. Candles, cheeses, hot dogs.
Ice cream, pickled peppers, clams, and sweet cakes. But with all the bargaining and excitement of the street festival, most things did not sell so well. According to one policeman, the depression has even hit the fiesta. Unquote. 
Speaker 5: Well, now I'm hungry. Pickled peppers, yes, hot dogs, cheeses, ice cream, sweet cakes.
And I'm sure that with the Great Depression raging here in the, in 1933 and people out of work, those old traditions became [01:05:00] even more valuable than ever. But how exactly was 1933 so momentous for the neighborhood? 
Speaker 3: Just a month later from what I just described, one could have strolled up First Avenue to 118th Street to eat at a new restaurant pizzeria called Patsy's, operated by Pasquale Patsy Lancieri, a business That of course is still open today.
And it is, in fact, it remains one of the few landmarks still around from this old Italian Harlem period now. Patsy claims to have innovated the idea of buying pizza by the slice, so I, 
Speaker 5: fortunately I think we know who to call. I think we have to call our friend Scott Wiener from Scott's Pizza Tours to quickly fact check that.
Speaker 3: Yeah, I think he might have something to say on that [01:06:00] fact. Regardless. Like a good cheesy slice, I think that claim seems to be a bit of a stretch.
But I am so hungry. So they do have this very famous slice window at Patsy's and last week I actually, I went there and had an amazing lunch in their dining room. I had a, a chicken parm with a nice glass of Pinot Noir and I specifically chose to sit underneath. A spectacular painting of Frank Sinatra.
Speaker 5: Old blue eyes looking down at Greg as you were chopping into a slab of chicken. Of course, Patsy's today has several restaurants throughout the city, but you can still visit that original location here on First Avenue. And no disrespect to Mr. Lancieri, but I think that there's even something else, right, that would raise the profile of [01:07:00] Italian Harlem that same year.
Yes you set 
Speaker 3: me up for this because that congressman, Fiorello LaGuardia, was elected mayor. In 1933 and was sworn in on January of 1934, and would be the first Italian American to be mayor of our fair city. Although I must note, actually, that he was Episcopalian. Yes. The first Catholic mayor of New York was William Grace, the Irish Catholic mayor, and he was elected actually all the way back in the 1880s, interestingly enough.
Speaker 5: But LaGuardia was instrumental in pulling New York through and out of. The Great Depression, and was an ally of President Franklin D. Roosevelt and his New Deal plans. These plans were felt throughout the city, but especially up here in East Harlem, which was a neighborhood that had a vibrant community, but it really had some lingering structural issues, particularly [01:08:00] in housing and schooling.
Speaker 3: And here. Is where I must present our almost regular show cameo appearance from our old friend and foe by which I mean Robert Moses, Robert Moses, commissioner of the parks department. By this time, he had a very particular interest in using some of that WPA money. I'm sorry, by which I mean the works progress administration, this massive federal program to use some of that money to build swimming pools.
Throughout the city. This was like a big thing for him in the mid 1930s and East Harlem would get its own swimming pool in Jefferson Park in June of 1936. Now, Tom, there is a photograph in the New York Daily News from the opening ceremony. Of the swimming pool being opened, of Mayor LaGuardia being surrounded by children in bathing suits.
Oh. But the newspaper [01:09:00] decided that they wanted to label this very charming photo in a very unfortunate way, okay? They had the tag under it, under it. Mob. Storms Mayor. Dot dot dot. Enjoy. Oh. Yeah. Almost smothered beneath avalanche of joyous whooping children, Mayor LaGuardia officially dedicated the new Thomas Jefferson Swimming Pool, unquote.
Speaker 5: Smothered beneath an avalanche of joyous whooping children. By a mob of children. Really? A mob? of children up here in Harlem's Little Italy, that is really bad, but it sounds like the Thomas Jefferson pool was an immediate hit. By the way, I have never until this moment thought of Thomas Jefferson swimming, swimming, 
Speaker 3: but Jefferson is not the only founding father [01:10:00] in East Harlem by this time.
Right next to the park would soon rise a huge new high school called Benjamin Franklin High School, an all boys school, which could accommodate, according to the Daily News, it could accommodate 2, 250 students. Wow. Okay. Now, it had originally opened in 1934 down on, East 108th Street, and the school was considered experimental for its day.
It was a passion project of a neighborhood resident, activist, and elementary school educator named Leonard Covello. And what was so experimental about it? Well, according to the building's landmark designation report, the one, the building here next to the park. To the park quote prior to the creation of Benjamin Franklin High School.
There was no public high school on the east side of [01:11:00] Manhattan above 14th Street or south of 166th Street in the Bronx. Isn't that incredible? DeWitt Clinton School in North Bronx struggled to meet the needs of 9, 300 boys enrolled there by 1931. 
Speaker 5: That is an amazing fact. There were private and religious high schools, but no public high schools.
Wow. So this was obviously needed. Yeah. But what was 
Speaker 3: so experimental about it? Well, the experiment came with Covello's approach, which is almost common sense today if you're an educator. And that approach was that the school should be part of the community, okay? In 1936, He wrote, quote, the responsibility of the school as an educational factor does not cease at the hour of dismissal in the afternoon.
The child does not appear from nowhere in the morning, [01:12:00] nor does he vanish into nowhere in the afternoon hours. He comes from and goes back into the surging life of the community in which the streets are making daily and hourly impacts upon his mind and consciousness. So this not only meant like it's got a proper outreach like English and adult education classes after hours, even citizenship assistance, but it also meant promoting those students Italian background in 
Speaker 5: a positive way.
Which was so needed because, you know, so many of these kids, I'm sure, were growing up facing negative portrayals that were in the media at the time. 
Speaker 3: Covello writes in his biography, quote, Throughout my whole elementary school career, I do not recall one mention of Italy. Or the Italian language. We got the idea that Italian meant something inferior, and a barrier [01:13:00] was erected between children of Italian origin and their parents.
This was the accepted process of Americanization. We were becoming Americans by learning how to be ashamed of our parents. And so did Covella's experiment work? I think you'd have to ask the individual students because I'm sure it had varying degrees of success, but he was convincing enough to the city that they then received funding to construct a brand new school here at Pleasant and 100.
And 15th street next to Thomas Jefferson park in 1942 upon the site of a former coal yard on a steer and quite like jarringly austere new structure, quite different than everything else in the neighborhood designed by Eric cabin. In a Georgian revival style in keeping with this whole like 
Speaker 5: founding fathers vibe [01:14:00] and by 1942 here The country was just getting into world war ii And just as some germans in yorkville south of harlem were experiencing, you know Discrimination for their heritage and connection to the to this enemy Some italians were also facing that same kind of harassment 
Speaker 3: Quoting from Maria Loreno's book, which I mentioned earlier, The Italian Americans, quote, In schoolyards, kids booed Italian kids, called them Mussolini, and flung the words Dago and Wop as easy as brown bag lunches.
For older boys, wearing the uniform of the U. S. military was the ultimate show of patriotism, and huge numbers of Italian Americans answered this call by enlisting. This includes many of the older students. At Benjamin Franklin High School, who would drop out to [01:15:00] enlist in the armed forces, 
Speaker 5: right? So that was one of the reasons that many students were dropping out of the high school at this time, right?
Speaker 3: You may be hinting at the fact that the. Population of Italian Harlem, it was now beginning to decrease, but that doesn't tell the whole story, of course, because there were new people moving in and there were new students moving into the school. For instance, there were more African American students as the overall black population of Harlem kept expanding.
Then, of course, there were more Puerto Rican 
Speaker 5: students. And you recorded a show a couple years ago about New York's Puerto Rican community, and this neighborhood in particular. Yeah, by the 1940s 
Speaker 3: and 50s, the culture of East Harlem would be increasingly dominated by these new Puerto Rican residents. And in fact, today, you know, the neighborhood, which is often referred to as El [01:16:00] Barrio, it's still very Puerto Rican culturally around here.
So as more Puerto Rican students moved into the school, Covello began modifying his curriculum, quoting from this landmark designation again, quote, as East Harlem became increasingly Puerto Rican, Covello translated much of his educational approach to be more broadly applicable, promoting a truly multicultural.
understanding of public education. Today, many approaches that Covello introduced in East Harlem's first high school are considered characteristics of a good school or a caring teacher. 
Speaker 5: Indeed. But as one group was starting to redefine this neighborhood, I guess that that also means that another group was moving out.
In this case, it was the Italians now moving out. 
Speaker 3: And there are many nuanced reasons why. I mean, certainly racial tensions between all of these various groups was [01:17:00] one of the reasons. Keep in mind, like Italians have now been here for what, six, seven decades by the end of the war and this new generation post war, they wanted better living conditions.
And now New York city had a highway system that allowed people to move out to the suburbs and to. even to places like Staten Island, or, you know, they could move down to South Brooklyn, Bensonhurst, Bay Ridge, the North Bronx, and 
Speaker 5: of course, even New Jersey. And this was happening in lower Manhattan as well, with the post war Italian population around Mulberry Street being largely replaced by a growing Chinese population.
But those Italian businesses that remained would become, you know, quote unquote, Little Italy. Yeah, THE Little Italy. Right, a tourist destination within, really, today's Chinatown, that holds onto a rather romantic image, [01:18:00] right, of a New York Italian community. 
Speaker 3: To be fair, with many businesses from that old Italian neighborhood, like it really is old, like you had Ferrara, Cafe Roma, Vincennes, like these places are authentic.
It is, it is authentically that old. Old Italian quarter in some ways, but it's also more of a carnival like scene, sometimes literally around San Gennaro, but this kind of thing did not happen up here in old Italian Harlem, partially because of the city's financial crisis of the 1960s and seventies.
Shall we say there was no Italian Renaissance up here for one thing. They had torn down that old second Avenue elevated train in 1940. And then, 
Speaker 5: you know, they didn't replace it. The Lexington Avenue IRT, the 456, would open in 1918. So the neighborhood was served by the subway. But Lexington 
Speaker 3: is [01:19:00] actually quite far.
That's about, like, three or four major avenues over, right? Like, if you live on Pleasant Avenue, that's a very long distance to walk. That second avenue elevated was a lot more convenient, and now it was completely gone. 
Speaker 5: And as of Today, they still have not replaced it, you know, with a, with a promised second Avenue subway, although they do say that it's getting close.
Huh. Mm hmm. The extension of the second Avenue line that they did build. Yes. Only goes up to 96th Street currently. 
Speaker 3: Right now, they are supposedly working on it to extend it up to Harlem. We may see this. In our lifetimes. We'll see. We'll see if it opens soon, but back to our story, suddenly without this elevated train, it was actually harder to get to East Harlem.
You had buses, vehicles, right? And then there was all of the public housing, which was built in the mid 20th century. Today, there are 24 NYCHA public housing developments [01:20:00] in East Harlem alone. On top of it. And, 
Speaker 5: you know, as with the greater story of public housing in New York, this solved many old problems, you know, relating to terrible inadequate housing, but it also created new ones.
Including the elimination of entire streets and of course, many street level businesses and even open public spaces. You know, it's a neighborhood 
Speaker 3: still with several issues and activists, neighborhood residents are bracing for the potential of even gentrification coming to East Harlem. You know, that the second Avenue subway, if that extension does open, what that might bring.
Fearing a loss of affordable housing, which is, of course, one of New York's most defining dilemmas throughout the city. 
Speaker 5: So then very little remains today of this era that [01:21:00] we've been speaking about, this era of Italian Harlem. 
Speaker 3: And really, if one goes looking for Old Italian Harlem. I suggest you do for a kind of a architectural historical scavenger hunt.
It's really down to just a handful of historic places on essentially two or three blocks. Now, last week I went to find some of the places that had been recently lost. There had been like even 10. 20 years ago, there had been more Italian businesses. For instance, there was a Moroni and Sons bakery on 116th street, which was a long lasting institution that closed in 2007 after 56 years in business.
I wanted to end on a story about Moroni and Sons. From the New York Times article in 2007, quote, No matter how far her loyal customers strayed, they kept coming back, updating Rosa Maroney with news [01:22:00] about funerals, weddings, and baptisms while she bagged their bread. And these customers were not just her Harlem neighbors, but New Yorkers from other neighborhoods, and breadwinners from all walks of life.
There was even an occasional celebrity sighting. On a summer day in the mid 1970s, Mrs. Maroney looked up from her cash register for the next in line and saw Frank Sinatra standing there. I was so nervous when I saw Sinatra, she recalled, but he was just another nice person, just like all of my customers.
Unquote.
Now, there may be little signs of Italian Harlem here or there, literally old signs. There used to be an old business named Asione Pharmacy at 2268 First Avenue. Today, you can see a little bit of that old mid century tiled sign, but it's peeking behind. You see a little bit. It's [01:23:00] peeking behind a modern green awning of the business that's currently there.
Maybe you'll see some. Italian flags flying here or there, with a proud display of the neighborhood's last Italian hangers on. But mostly, it's just Patsy's with its big dining room portrait of Sinatra, tiny Raios of the pasta sauce fame across the street from Thomas Jefferson Park. They're all still serving Italian food at exclusive tables we will probably never get to eat at.
And, of course, the Church of Our Lady of Carmel, where every year on the second weekend of August, The Julio Society of East Harlem still throws an annual festival to the Madonna, attracting thousands and thousands of revelers and worshipers, a tradition which traces itself all the way back to the early years of Italian Harlem.
Speaker 5: Visit our website, Bowery boys [01:24:00] history.com for more information about this and all of our shows. and follow us on well, an increasingly problematic social media platform list, including Instagram, Facebook threads and blue sky. 
Speaker 3: What are we going to do? I know what you can do. What I suggest is you join us on patrion.
com slash Barry boys and join us to listen to our exclusive podcast called side streets where. We just dropped a couple big announcements about live events. I would even describe one as an experience. It will. It is coming up the spring. So you will hear about that later. But if you want to hear about it now, go to Patreon and you'll get access to tickets to those events first before we announce them over here, but we promise.
You'll love following us over there for lots of reasons very entertaining show side streets is a rollicking good time If we do say so ourselves if we do You [01:25:00] can hear all of that and more at patreon. com slash Barry boys 
Speaker 5: And of course join us in the streets or inside now in the in the winter for walking tours of some of our favorite neighborhoods and walks through museums, even a walk through Grand Central Terminal over at Bowery Boys Walks.
We've got walking tours past Gilded Age mansions. You can eat your way through Chinatown, explore Art Deco in Midtown. We encourage you to join a public tour or book a private tour for your family or your company. Over at Bowery boys walks. com. So thank you very much for listening. Have a 
Speaker 3: great New York week, whether you live here or not.
See you real soon. 
Speaker 5: Arrivederci.
Speaker 7: Welcome friends to the playful scratch from the California lottery. We've got a special guest today. The scratcher scratch master himself, Juan. Juan, you've mastered 713 [01:26:00] playful ways to scratch. Impressive. How'd you do it? Well, I began with a coin, then tried a guitar pick. I even used a cactus once. I Even this mic right here.
See? See? Well there you have it. Scratchers are fun no matter how you scratch. Scratchers from the California Lottery. A little play can make your day. Please play responsibly. Must be 18 years or older to purchase, play, or claim.