Speaker: [00:00:00] It's Francis Lam, host of The Splendid Table, and we are coming your way, LA. Join us for a special live taping of the show where I'll be talking with some of LA's leading food writers and favorite chefs. It's March 23rd at the Aratani Theater. Tickets at laist. com slash events. 
Speaker 2: We all know the story of how America got to the moon, but there's still another story that's pretty much unknown.
The story of the black aerospace engineers in Los Angeles who helped get us there. The other from LAS, wherever you get your podcasts. 
Speaker 3: I'm Brandon Losantos and this is How to LA, the podcast that helps you discover Los Angeles. On a recent Friday afternoon, producer Monica Bushman and I drove out to LAX.
We weren't getting on a flight though, or picking anyone up. So you might be thinking why the heck would you go to LAX on a Friday afternoon like we should know better, right? But we were there to check out a museum one that we discovered [00:01:00] because it's one of 64 museums featured in a new book titled Also on view, unique and unexpected museums of Greater Los Angeles.
Hello there. Hi, Todd. Brian. Hey, yes. The book was written by Todd LaRue, who we met at the museum. It's called The Flight Path Museum at LAX and it's housed in a former airport terminal. 
Speaker 4: There's like an invisible bubble around LAX that is like a do not go. Area unless you have to but you go like a little bit around the other way We're still on the edge of the tarmac and it's like a total time capsule.
Speaker 5: We're now in the Imperial Terminal So this is a 1961 facility That was the charter terminal 
Speaker 3: Jean Christophe d'Agahoy Dig is a museum president and also an airport planner He also goes by JC. 
Speaker 5: So if you flew charter airlines, for example, or Laker Airways or Condor Usually from Europe, you'd land at this, this facility and air stairs would come up, you'd come off onto the tarmac and walk out to the terminal.
And then later it was MGM Grand Air, which is a premium all first class airline between Los [00:02:00] Angeles and New York. And um, for the last 20, 21 years it's now been the museum. 
Speaker 3: The museum focuses on the history of LAX and the aviation industry in Southern California. Big cargo planes on the tarmac sit just outside the windows.
And there's also a vintage plane that's part of the museum. 
Speaker 5: The Spirit of 76 is a, is a Douglas DC 3 that was built in the early 40s, just a few miles north from here in Santa Monica. Um, and so the DC 3 is one of the most successful airliners ever built. People may not know the name DC 3, but they've seen a DC 3 somewhere in a movie, in a photo somewhere.
Um, and this one flew for TWA for, for many years before being bought by And then it was donated to the California Science Center. And the California Science Center is actually going to refurbish it and put it at the foot of the Space Shuttle Endeavor when it goes vertical. So this will be back on display in a restored state at the California Science Center.
Speaker 4: And the interior is like a plush sort of 70's corporate [00:03:00] executive. It's pad, it's pretty swanky. 
Speaker 5: It absolutely is. I mean, it may be a slow plane by today's standards, but I fly longer in that than an economy seat on any airline today. 
Speaker 3: Inside the museum, there are airplane models, memorabilia from now defunct airlines like Pan Am and MGM Grand Air, and an impressive collection of flight attendant uniforms.
About 700 of them. Just imagine all the little kids who come in here, they're like, oh my god, mom, dad. The airplanes, and the fashions. 
Speaker 5: Well, that's kind of the idea. Um, listen, I grew up just fascinated by aviation and, um, I kind of have a debt of existence to aviation because my parents are immigrants and so without aviation, I just simply wouldn't be here.
So, um, every time a kid comes in, we want to see that kid in the future be a pilot, be a air traffic controller, mechanic, airport planner like myself, something in aviation. So we do have scholarships and aviation programs to help them teach how to fly or We do talks about [00:04:00] other things in aviation, so it's really about that next generation of aviation pioneers.
Speaker 3: The reason the museum is called the Flight Path Museum goes back to its origins. Back in the 90s, a group of aviation enthusiasts formed a non profit and raised the funds to make their own version of the Hollywood Walk of Fame. Near LAX on Sepulveda Boulevard. 
Speaker 5: So you'll see the plaques, bronze plaques, with the names of famous aviators or famous aviation industry leaders and other people that had a role to play in the history of aviation here in Southern California.
Over here we have the five first airlines that came to LAX from Burbank. Because Burbank was the original airport for the L.A. area. Uh, because it was closer to downtown, that's kind of like the, in the 1920s, that was the center of urbanization. And so Burbank was closer, but as it became surrounded by residential areas, and they couldn't expand necessarily, Los Angeles, L.
A. X., there wasn't [00:05:00] as much development around, so it had room to grow into the airport that we know today. And those are the first five airlines that came over from Burbank. So you have TWA, Western Airlines, American Airlines, United, and Pan Am. 
Speaker 3: What is something that when people come, they're like amazed about or they, they learn about?
What's the one thing that pops in your head? A 
Speaker 5: lot of them are amazed by the uniforms, of course, just because to see so many uniforms in one location that doesn't exist really. Uh, the other part is. We can go out onto the airfield. We can escort people out onto the airfield and to be that close. When I was a kid, I never got that experience.
And so I'm 100 percent jealous as a grown man of these kids coming in, having this experience to be close to planes because I am sure because of that, they're like, I want to be a pilot or I want to work in this. I want to just get closer to these jets. And so anytime we can get that, that's the reward.
That's just get more people to be aviation nuts like us. 
Speaker 3: And of course, during our visit, we asked if we could go out onto the airfield ourselves. [00:06:00] So we're now, uh, walking outside of the museum because we have exclusive access to be able to go to the tarmac. 
Speaker 5: From here you can see the terminals. So you can see the original 1961 control tower over there, and the tower that replaced it in 1996 over there.
And, um, Just to see the movement of the ballet of vehicles around an aircraft when it comes in because time is money. So they gotta service these aircrafts as fast as possible, make sure that they're safe, and then get them out the door, you know, so that people can go on to their vacations or see their families and loved ones, things like that.
Speaker 4: Even to just be, like, getting this perspective, it's like a totally different scale and experience of, of the tarmac, the airport, like, seeing these things, it's, it makes it feel like a giant parking lot, which is what it is, but you don't think about that when you're in your seat, like, getting ready to take off.
Speaker 5: This is [00:07:00] the cool thing that you can't get at, at none of the museums, just, that's, that's it, that's what it is.
Speaker 3: Coming up after the break, we'll hear more from Talaru. About his book Also On View, unique and Unexpected Museums of Greater Los Angeles.
Speaker 2: This week on La Maid, the Other Moonshot, we meet Shelby Jacobs. In 1960, 
Speaker 5: my high school principal came to me and he said, Shelby, uh. I 
Speaker 2: understand you want to major in engineering. Uh, so, but yeah, he said there are no black engineers. I recommend you take a trade. Instead, Shelby went on to work on the Apollo missions and played a critical role in America's race to space.
Listen to The Other Moonshot wherever you get your podcasts.
Speaker 6: Hi, this is Larry Mantle. The 23rd annual Film Week Academy Awards preview is [00:08:00] coming right up on Saturday, February 22nd at the historic Alex Theatre in Glendale. I'll be there with all of our critics on stage, watching clips. of the Oscar nominated films and talking over all the major categories. Make sure you're there.
It's part of our AirTalk 40th Anniversary Tour, the 23rd annual Film Week Academy Awards preview with the Alex, tickets at laist. com slash events.
Speaker 3: We are back talking with author Tyler Rue about his new book on LA museums. 
Speaker 4: You asked about like big takeaways for visitors. I know this isn't JC's favorite thing, but One thing that really continues to strike me, when I first visited, there was a little display in this hallway about, it turns out that LAX lays claim to being the only airport with its own hit song, and there was a whole display about the 1971 country hit LA International Airport by Susan Ray, who was part of the Bakersfield Sound.
She played with Buck Owens. She's still around, actually. Uh, and it's like an amazingly catchy [00:09:00] song. I got really into it after, you know, doing all this research. 
Speaker 7: LA International Airport Where the big jet engines roll LA International Airport I won't see him anymore 
Speaker 4: My wife and I were coming to the airport, you know, and we were, we, We drove in, and we were getting off the freeway, and you're kind of in line already to try to park.
And we were blasting this LA International Airport song, singing along, and these two old ladies in a, like, old school yellow cab next to us burst out laughing, and we had this whole, like, moment in the street, like, at the airport. It was awesome. 
Speaker 3: After getting a tour of the Flight Path Museum at LAX with Todd, we sat down to talk a little bit more about his book, the museums that are featured in it, and how he got interested in this project in the first place.
Speaker 4: I've always really had an interest in unique sort of outside of the box places and stories and creative expressions. So [00:10:00] when I moved to LA in 2012, I was already really fascinated by folk art environments like Things like, you know, the Watts Towers is the most famous local example, or the Rubell Castle, which is in the book, a really fantastic place out in Glendora.
Uh, but that kind of really singular outstanding places, those are sort of few and far between, or at least they don't tend to survive very long because it's really the dream and life's work of an individual. And when they're gone, the odds of it surviving are not great. And it's sort of, I don't really remember exactly how I arrived to this.
Discovery that so many small historical museums that don't have much online presence. You can't really know until you get there what exactly they have to show or share. But I started visiting these and realizing that almost without exception, they had something that fascinated me or surprised me or I found intriguing, exciting.
And just being able to have that excuse to go to a part of this vast city that I might not otherwise find myself in, really kind of fueled me and [00:11:00] I kind of became obsessed with that. pursuit. And that's what this book is like the result of that 
Speaker 3: to me. It's so interesting that you chose to say unique and unexpected museums.
Um, for you, what does that mean? And why did you choose instead of saying like lesser known or like, you know, I, I think your language about why you chose these 
Speaker 4: Yeah, I mean, I think it's all about the kind of experience that you can have there. Um, you know, a lot of these descriptors are kind of subjective.
You can throw around a lot of words like small museums, although that's not always going to be relevant. The Southern California Railway Museum, which You know, it's maybe little known to people who live in central LA, but it's by land area. It's one of the biggest museums in Southern California. So, uh, you know, it's kind of tricky how you want to describe these things.
But for me, it was more about what are the places that I think are telling and sharing really incredible stories. 
Speaker 3: Todd's day job is a director of special projects for the Library [00:12:00] Foundation of Los Angeles, which supports the Los Angeles Public Library, and that's also connected to his unexpected museum project.
Speaker 4: I've been really fortunate to be able to do work that really overlaps with all of my curiosity and interests in the world and the city. And I've been there for the better part of a decade, mostly producing large scale cultural initiatives, exhibitions, programs. And, uh It was for an exhibition we did in 2018 called 21 Collections, where my boss and mentor at the time, Ken Brecker, he knew that I was visiting dozens, hundreds of small museums and unique sites on all my spare time, every weekend I'd come back with stories.
And so he assigned me to kind of curate this. Exhibition that we had and in research and preparation for that was when I really got organized and kind of obsessed with trying to document. I created my spreadsheet which has almost 800 sites now and tried to find and visit every single museum I could in greater Los Angeles.
Speaker 3: I'm gonna put you in the hot seat real quick. Oh, okay. Haha. You've covered over 60 [00:13:00] museums in your book. What are some of the standouts that you just want to, like, name drop real quick? 
Speaker 4: You know, there's so many wonderful places. Even selecting 64, which sounds like a lot of museums, was a really tough thing to do.
I mean, there are so many more places that I wish we could have given a proper feature to. But places like the Antelope Valley Indian Museum, which was created as, like, a private getaway by this outsider anthropologist and Art teacher called Howard Arden Edwards. It's this fabulous, crazy looking Swiss chalet like buildings in built into the boulders and the desert with a native American motifs painted on it.
And he had his amateur native American collection. There is a private museum going back to the 1930s and it's been a state park for the last couple of decades. And they've had to grapple with that kind of complicated history of this like independent. Outsider white man trying to interpret native culture through his lens that is no longer what we would consider, you know, [00:14:00] appropriate and how do they honor the history of that site as its own unique place, but also the communities and the the cultures that their real mandate is to represent as well.
So I mean the the layers of history there is just one of the things that kind of really grabs me and like is what makes going to these unexpected places so endlessly fascinating. 
Speaker 3: You know, I think I was fortunate to go to school out here in Los Angeles and my teachers would take me to the Science Center or LACMA or other huge museums.
I feel like museums are centers of learning. Um, what did you learn about Southern California, the L.A. region as you visited the museums and documented for your book? 
Speaker 4: You know, I learned so much about L.A. history through this project and almost I felt like through osmosis or through the back door somehow, like I wasn't setting out to become a historian of Southern California, but I've amassed such like a deep well of, of knowledge about the region and what makes it tick and all the different [00:15:00] communities that exist here, how they came and grew and interact.
And uh, You know, there's one place in, to that question that I do want to shout out, and that's the La Historia Society in El Monte, because I ended up going to more than a hundred unique, like, small historical societies that just really want to tell the story of their immediate little community or neighborhood, um, and, you know, there's, they have a lot of overlap in the types of stories that they shared, the names of the families that you see on the street signs in the area, uh, who lived in this house and how many children did they have?
And it's interesting, but when I got to La Astoria, I realized that all those other places were really limited to the perspective of the white people in the community. And in El Monte where their La Astoria is situated, there's an official historical society a block away. And in the nineties, the largely the Mexican American community in that area decided or kind of wanted to have their own meetings because they didn't feel like they [00:16:00] were represented in this museum's display.
And it wasn't an antagonistic thing. Their first meetings were actually at the Historical Society, but they decided to form their own. organization because they had their own perspective to share and I found that I would argue every museum, large and small, has a perspective, has an outlook on the world, and it's, it doesn't represent everyone, right?
There is always going to be more stories, there's always going to be more perspectives, and I found that just by going to as many places as I could find, it As a whole, they come together to create a more complete, more equitable, more interesting picture of what Los Angeles is. Um, so I really encourage people to visit every unique, small museum and place they can find in their area.
And if they have the bandwidth and the time to get out a little bit further, then even better. 
Speaker 3: That was Todd Leroux. He's the author of Also on View, Unique and Unexpected Museums of Greater Los Angeles. It's out now. [00:17:00] There's also a very cool companion website, everymuseum. la, which includes Todd's full directory complete with a map of the almost 800 museum spaces he's identified in our region.
Also, Todd will be talking about his book tonight at the Philosophical Research Society in Los Feliz. And on November 17th, he'll be at the Central Library as part of their L.A. Made series. Our thanks to Todd and JC for sharing their time with us for this episode. Let me know if you end up going to an unexpected museum yourself.
Write to me at bdelosantos at scpr. org. And thanks for listening. Hasta la proxima.
This episode was produced by Monica Bushman. Our HOTLA team also includes producer Victoria Alejandro, director of content development, Catherine Mailhouse and vice president for LA studios, Shayna Naomi Krokman. Our engineer is Hasmik Pagosyan. Support for this [00:18:00] podcast is made possible by Gordon and Donna Crawford who believe that quality journalism makes Los Angeles a better place to live.
Speaker 8: I'm Franklin Leonard, founder of The Blacklist. We know what makes a good screenplay. But when it comes to what makes a blockbuster, or a box office bomb, the truth is, nobody knows anything. Including our star panel of podcast guests. I was told this was a quiz program. Yeah, 
Speaker 9: I mean, 
Speaker 8: just 
Speaker 9: so you know, I just thought it was a riffing podcast.
Speaker 8: Nobody Knows Anything, presented by FX. Find it wherever you get your podcasts.